 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on support and resistance. I'll begin by talking about what support and resistance is best. Well, the answer is it depends on context. Any support and resistance can be best depending on the current situation. Forex support and resistance is not as precise as support and resistance in the E-mini and mini stock markets because there is no central exchange where all the trades are reported. Every broker, every bank has its own price. So traders with one broker are seeing charts that are slightly different from traders with another broker. As a result, support and resistance is not as precise. I'll then move on and give examples of support and resistance. Moving average, that's a reflection of the average price. That is often support or resistance. Here we're in a bull trend and you can see the market is finding support anytime it gets near or below the moving average. Trend lines, here we have a very tight bull channel. When the market broke below it, the bulls came back. The top of channels, reversal down, reversal down. Draw a line for a potential top of a channel and see what the market does. It broke out and then it reversed. So resistance at the top of a channel. Prior highs and lows. The market got to this high, sold off. Got to this high, sold off. Below here, it got there, just a little bit below, rallied. Got a little bit below, rallied. Here, it got to that prior high and broke out and then pulled back and it became support. Measured move, we have a leg up in the trading range. Odds were it would be followed by a leg down. Instead we got a breakout. So you got to be thinking about a potential measured move up based upon the height of that leg in the trading range. Big round numbers, 2100. And then a smaller round number, 2090, 2080, 2070. You can see the market raced up to the big round number. Tried to break above it, pulled back. Tried to break above it a second time, tested it, bounced again. Which one's the most important? Well, any type of support and resistance can be the most important one on the chart. It depends on the context and it depends upon the strength of the support and resistance. Forex support and resistance is not as precise for many reasons. I'll talk about some of them now. Five minute chart of the Euro versus the dollar. Every broker has its own data. Many forex trades are taking place simultaneously at different locations all over the world. And nobody reports the trades to any one central location. So the prices are not the same everywhere. The chart that you get is not the same as the chart someone else gets if they have a different broker. Because the major institutions are aware of the differences among the different Forex brokers and Forex banks, they are able to arbitrage and keep the prices close to one another. If one price is a little high, they'll sell at the broker or the bank that's high and buy at the bank or broker that's low. Keeping prices close to one another, but not identical. Three pushes up. One, two, three. We have a wedge top. Measured move. High two attempt with a good buy signal bar. Instead we get a big breakout. And you have to assume the market's going to get at least a little bit more down. Here it got a lot more down. And we have a pullback. Testing the breakout point. Maybe a measured move in between the two points. Maybe a measured move simply from this point. But not identical. Three pushes up. One, two, three. We have a wedge top. Measured move. High two attempt with a good buy signal bar. The market's going to get at least a little bit more down. Here it got a lot more down. And we have a pullback. Testing the breakout point. Maybe a measured move in between the two points. Maybe a measured move simply from this point. We have a bare flag. Maybe a double top bare flag. It tried to break to the downside, but then it reversed to the upside. Pulled back below the breakout point. Continued up. Pulled back again to the breakout point. And continued up. So we have support here. Maybe it'll lead to a measured move up. It did. The space between this low and that high became a measuring gap. The market went a little bit above it. Tried to resume up two more times. Failed. And then went the other direction. Resistance. Because of the arbitrage activity among the institutions, the prices among the different brokers usually are fairly close to one another. Usually they're within a pip or two. But they're rarely ever identical. Look at this low. It's 1.1419. But it might be 1.1422 at another broker. Or 1.8 at other brokers. There's no centralized market. No one tells other brokers where the last trade was. And therefore the last trade is irrelevant. And it can never be known. And it can never be known. Because there's no central place where everyone reports trades. Every bank conducts its own trades and doesn't report to anyone. You could have hundreds of banks having trades taking place simultaneously. All at slightly different prices. So there's no last trade. Last trade. And the result is. The last trade on one chart might be one price. And a chart from another broker would be another price. For example, look at this close. It might be 1.1384 at one broker. And 8.3 at another broker. Or 8.7 at a different broker. Furthermore, it can change instantaneously within a fraction of a second at all of the different brokers. This is an example comparing Interactive Brokers and TradeStation. TradeStation no longer provides Forex trading. And Interactive Brokers has greatly restricted their Forex trading. Interactive Brokers created this chart based upon the trades its clients are placing. Trading Brokers has completely restricted the Forex trading data. People send to the site there for both saving and selling retail broker Point. In the same case if they saw the markets trading interest trading present either. In the same field of policy the currencies can pick against minus 1 and 10 or 5, which Which allows all markets to go segur show up on lower current points ofェמן. The single chart 1988 shows a figure starting place outline. chart for interactive brokers is the midpoint between the bid and the ask. And for TradeStation, it's the bid only. The chart ignores the ask and therefore that also accounts for differences between the charts and the prices. You can see over here for interactive brokers look at that high. And then here's the same time for TradeStation and this is one pip lower than the price for interactive brokers. I want to give some examples now of support and resistance. This is the euro versus the dollar and there are 200 ticks per bar on this chart. Because Forex support and resistance is less precise than, for example, the E-mini, traders are less concerned about exact prices and they're less concerned about the types of charts. For example, tick charts here or charts based upon time, like a five minute chart. Not everyone uses five minute charts. This chart has 200 ticks per bar and the patterns are clear. It doesn't matter what type of chart you use. You could use time charts using any amount of time per bar. One minute, 15 minutes, 60 minutes. You can use tick charts that have any number of ticks per bar. 50 ticks, 219 ticks, 1,000 ticks. You can use other types of charts as well. It doesn't matter. They're all representations of what the market is doing. And the patterns are going to be similar on all charts. A five minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. You can see some measured moves. Not precise, but close enough for traders to pay attention to the support and resistance. At some point, computers will totally dominate forex trading, just like they do the E-mini and most major stock markets. Also, funds are increasing their participation. And over time, the math will become more important and support and resistance will be more precise. Now it's very good, but I believe over time it'll become extremely precise. Reversals. As soon as traders see a reversal down, they begin to look for another reversal down so they can draw a line. They could draw a line here, but once it goes above it, they have another reversal down. They'll draw the line here. Reversal down here. Reversal down here. See what the market does when it gets to the line. Broke above it, traders could then draw another line using that high. The channel began as fairly tight. However, once we've had this breakout, it now is fairly broad. You could draw another channel with that low and this low. In any case, Forex channels, the prices are constantly going beyond lines, more so than with other markets, the imprecision of Forex pricing. As the trend progresses, traders like to redraw lines and they're looking for best fits. So for example, traders might say, well, maybe at this point here, they'll look back and say, what's the best fit line? Maybe using near that high, maybe this high, this high, and then looking to see what happens when the market gets near that best fit line. You're trying to find some line that the market appears to be respecting. Turning down here, turning down here, turning down here. At some point you decide, if I use lines based upon highs, the market never gets there. Yet, it seems to be turning down in the general area of a line here. So traders will use an approximate line and see what the market does when it gets near it. You want to capture the overall trend and not worry that the lines are rarely precise with Forex markets. If a line is not obvious, it's not important, computers will not be using it and it will not provide much support or resistance. Can you sell this reversal down? Well, you might be at the bottom of a tight trading range and it might not go far. However, we have a breakout bar closing on its low, a big bear bar closing near its low. At this point, the odds are high that we're going at least a little bit lower. Higher probability of profit if you sell a breakout with strong follow through. I'll sell the close market here, expecting at least a little bit more down. Bears will also sell reversals down from the trend line. They have a good looking bear bar closing on its low, reversing down from a best fit trend line. They'll sell on the stop just below the low of that bar and they'll get filled right here. If they sell here, where's their stop? Possibly above the high of this bear bar. Or they could put it above the most recent lower high up here. Both are acceptable. If you have two reasonable choices for a stop, you can use either one. If you use a tighter stop, you'll lose more often but you'll lose less money. If you use a wider stop here or here, you'll lose less often. When you do lose, your losses will be bigger. But if all the stop choices are reasonable and you take 100 trades, your profit will be about the same no matter which one you take. The goal is to just use a reasonable stop. In a bull trend, traders are looking to buy a reversal up. The market reversed up here. It reversed up here. You can draw a line. And then see what the market does when it gets near the line. You can see it undershot the line. Did not get to the line. Tried to get down to it again. Tried to get down to it again. And it keeps reversing up. You have to assume it's not going to get to the line. And it's probably worth buying above the high of the prior bar. A second entry buy. First entry above this bar. Second entry above this bar. Three different attempts to get down here. It could not. You always have to be looking for other lines. We have a reversal down here. And a big reversal down here. And a big reversal down here. That might be an important line. And if so, it's always worth creating a parallel and dragging it to some point in between that contains all of the prices. So you pick this bar because if you draw the parallel line at this low, all of the prices between the two tops will be above the line. And then after that second top, you see if the computers are paying attention to this line. And clearly they are here and again here. So the markets are using a parallel line. Or at least a lot of computers are. If one line is not working and another line is, you get rid of the line that's not working. And you should be buying reversals up. We have reversal up and a second entry buy here. You could buy above this small doji bar or above this bull bar here. You could buy above this bar. Or you could take a second entry here. This is a double bottom and these two tails a micro double bottom. The market is rallying from near the bottom of the bull channel. If you buy here, you have a micro double bottom. Reasonable to put a stop here. However, it's also reasonable to put a stop below here. This is a major higher low. It's a low that had a reversal up to a new high and the reversal up was strong. Again, if you use the tighter stop, you lose less but you lose more often. And if you use the wider stop, you lose more when you do lose but you lose less often. Both are reasonable and therefore using either one is okay. Using a stop that's way too far down or way too tight, you're going to lose money. So if you buy here and put a stop two pips below, you're going to lose money. If you buy here and put a stop two pips below, you're going to lose money. Most patterns do not look perfect. They do not look like textbook patterns. But if they look reasonably good, they're good enough and the lines will create support and resistance. Wedges, for example, they're rarely ever perfect. But if the context is good, traders will look for reversals at the lines. We reverse down, we reverse down, you can create a line. We reverse down again, traders will sell. Reverse down, reverse down, create a line. And look what happens when the market gets near that line. Same here. Reverse down, reverse down. Watch to see what happens when the market gets near that line. When you see it reversing, you look to sell. Same again here. Reversal, reversal, and then see what happens up here. Now, I have this wedge one, two, three. And you say, wait a minute, Al. This high part of this bull channel is before the bear trend ended. We went to a lower low. And that's common because trends usually transition from one to another. So you have a bear trend and then a bull trend. And this is the transition period. And very often, the first high in the bull trend comes before the final low in the bear trend. That's just part of the transition from bear to bull. Wedge bull flag does not look perfect, but traders bought the reversal up from the line. The market came back down and tested the top of the channel and reversed up again. So traders are paying attention to this as a wedge bull flag. Bull breakout. Pull back to about 50%. Three pushes down. One, two, three. And then a reversal up. Nested wedge bottom. One, two. One, two. And then you see what happens at the line when the market gets near it again. Micro double bottom. Bull bar closing on its high. Good looking wedge bottom. Expect at least two legs up. One pull back. And then two. It's nested because in the third leg there's a smaller wedge. One, two, three. Higher probability that you get a reversal up. Three pushes down. One, two, three. But there's a problem with this wedge. And that is the channel is very, very tight. The pull backs are small. A tight channel like this, usually a minor reversal. And the rally becomes part of a trading range or a bear flag. Good looking rally, but did not get very far. And it became a bear flag, followed by lower prices. The market is always paying attention to prior highs and lows. And the result is you get a lot of double tops and double bottoms. If the market rallies near a prior high and reverses down, it creates a double top. Most double tops, most double bottoms are not exact. The second high is usually a little bit above or a little bit below. Sometimes it's a lot above or a lot below. Double top. The market got near that high and reversed down again. A bear bar, signal bar, so you sell below its low. A bear bar reversing down, sell below its low. We have a high here and the market got near it and reversed down. This is a double top even though this high is below that high. Here's the signal bar. You could sell below this bar and get filled here. You could sell below this bar, second entry, and get filled there. This is a double top. This high is above that high. You could call it a higher high major trend reversal or you could simply call it a double top. A strong bull breakout, but look at the reversal down. A good bear bar closing on its low. This is probably a bull trap. Trapping traders into believing this is going to be a successful breakout. But terrible follow through for the bulls. Bears will sell on a stop just below the low of that bar and they'll get filled right here. Small double top bear flag. The market tried to go up here. Tried to go up here. You can call this a double top bear flag. You can call this a double top bear flag. You can call this high with any of these highs a double top bear flag. To me, I would view it as this is the start of the sideways correction and this is the end of it. So to me the double top would be one of these two highs and that high. In any case, you're looking to sell below a bar as it reverses down. And we have a small bear body. Reasonable to sell on a stop right below the low of that bar. Tight bear channel. Trying to reverse up. A reversal above a tight channel usually does not get very far. And you can see we reversed down. And it tested this high or any of these highs. So to me this is a double top bear flag. Maybe with that high and that high. I'm looking to sell a reversal down. This bar went outside down. The bar before. Bear bar closing on its low. Reasonable to sell on the stop below that bar. Or below this bar. Or below the pullback bar. And get filled right here. The market tried to rally. It failed. It tried to rally strongly again. Slightly higher high. But it's basically a test of this high. Maybe a test of this high. For me this is a double top right here. These two highs. Or some computers will say this high is testing that high. And the double top is here. In any case, bad follow through. Bear bar closing near its low. Traders will sell on a stop right below the low of that bar. And get filled right there. Another double top. You get several little pushes up from the first top. for the second top. It's a failed head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Does not matter. It's the top of a tight trading range. First attempt up is here. The second attempt up is here or here. It's a double top. Traders are going to sell below the low of this bar. And the bulls will do the opposite. They're looking for reversals up after a test of a prior low. The market sold off, tried to rally. Sold off even stronger to a slightly lower low. But this is a double bottom bull flag. You're in a bull trend. You have a couple attempts to reverse down. And now the market's reversing up. Traders will buy above the high of this bar and get filled here. Bear trend. Trying to resume down. The bulls bought and they bought again. The bears tried to reverse down and it failed. Double bottom. This low and that low. And micro double bottom. This low and that low. A bull bar. Traders will buy on a stop right here. Strong bull breakout. Deep pullback. And then look what happened here. This sell off might in fact simply be a pullback to test the bottom of this first breakout. And this could be a large double bottom. With this low. Initially with that low. And then with this low. And then with this low. When I look at this chart. I think this is a double bottom here and here. The lowest and most recent of the higher lows. Traders will buy a reversal up. Taking a chance. That this is maybe a higher low. Major trend reversal. Maybe there was a bear trend over here. Very strong bull breakout. And then this is simply a pullback. A bull flag. Testing the bottom of the channel. So bull breakout. So a spike. And then a pullback. And then a wedge channel. Tried to break above the wedge channel. Failed. Strong bull trend. And pullback. And all of this might simply be a pullback from this initial breakout. And testing the bottom of that initial pullback. Then the bulls have a reasonable chance of getting a resumption up. The market reversed up here. Now it has a micro double bottom. A pair of good looking bull bars. Traders will buy above the high of the bar here. Or above this high and get filled right there. Traders are looking for breakout tests all the time. For example, in a bear trend, if there's a breakout, traders will watch to see what happens if there's a rally back to the breakout point. If the trend resumes down, traders will sell. It's a breakout test. Here we have a pretty tight trading range. And a pretty good bear breakout. The market was trying to create a failed breakout and a resumption up. Instead, it failed to get very far. And the market's reversing down again. Traders are looking to sell below the low of the prior bar. And they got filled here. Part of the reason why we get this pullback. Well, you get some profit taking. The bears who shorted for any reason up here or right on the breakout will take partial profits once the market goes far enough down for them to get a scale. So you have some bears buying. And then you have scale-in bulls betting the trading range would continue. And they had a limit order to buy at the bottom of the range. And then they see this and they say, uh-oh, I'm in trouble. However, they expect a test back up. They expect some profit taking from the bears. So those bulls will scale in, buy more, lower, maybe the size of a scalp, maybe two or three times the size of a scalp. And then they'll look to get out either at the original breakout point or a little bit below. They get filled here to buy. And if they buy more here, the pullback was more than above the midpoint of their two entries. They were able to avoid a loss by scaling in. They buy here, buy more here. Their average entry price is here. This allowed them to get out. But that second buying helped create the pullback that tested the breakout point. Both bulls and bears will sell after a strong breakout. The bulls will sell to give up. And the bears who did not sell originally are looking to sell as well. And the result is a second leg down after a strong breakout. The markets in a bull trend here initially broke below a major high or low. Major because a very strong bull breakout to a new high. So this is a very important price. As long as the market stays above it, traders will assume the bull trend is still in effect. Once the market falls below it, traders will conclude the market's no longer in a bull trend. It's either in a trading range or in a bear trend. The market broke below it. Tried to get back above. Failed. Traders will sell. The reversal down. Tried to get above it again. Failed again. A second test of the breakout. A second breakout test. A bear bar. They'll sell below that bear bar and get filled here on the reversal down. The bulls do the same thing. They're looking for pullbacks to breakout points and then they buy reversals up. You can see a very strong breakout. Breakout of what? Well, above this high. Above that high. Above these highs. They're all breakouts. Here, the market tried to reverse back down to the lowest breakout point and it failed. The bulls resumed. We reversed up from a test of the breakout point. Bulls will buy above that bull bar and get filled here. A breakout. Another stronger breakout. A pullback. Look to the left to see if it's testing something. It is. It's testing the top of this range. Bulls will buy a reversal up. Either above that bear bar. Usually better to buy above a bull bar. So you can buy above this bar and get filled here. Or you can say it's a high two bull flag. Trying to go up here. Trying to go up here. In this particular case, it's reasonable to buy above a bear bar. Micro double bottom. Down, up. And then this bar went down, up. Two attempts to go down. Both failing. In a bull trend. Traders will buy on a stop above the high of the prior bar and get filled here. Same thing. Trying to reverse down. Look to the left. Is it testing something? It is. It's testing this high. Trying to reverse down again. Look to the left. Is it testing a prior high? Yes. It's testing this prior high. So this is simply a breakout test. This is simply a breakout test. Of the breakout point here, bulls will buy a reversal up, especially above a bull bar. Get filled here. Another breakout and then a pullback. Look to the left. Is it testing something? It looks like it's testing here. Bulls will buy a reversal up. This breakout test failed. And you can see we've got a breakout here. This is bulls giving up. We have a wedge top. A bull breakout above the wedge top. And then a second reversal. So we tried to top out here. The top failed. And now we're trying to top out again a second time. So you have to be thinking that this might be a significant top. Maybe we'll test the bottom of the biclimax. The bulls of what here will be pretty quick to get out. Like below a micro double top or a double top here, looking for at least a second leg down. Bulls will be quick to get out. You can call it a triangle. Three pushes up here and then bare bar. And then another bull bar. Second push up. Bare bar. And then another bull bar. So the third push up. I began by talking about what support and resistance was best. And it depends on context. On any particular chart, any type of support or resistance can be very important. Forex support and resistance is not as precise as it is with the E-mini because every broker has its own charts based upon the trades that are taking place with that broker. And other brokers have different banks and prices that are slightly different. Nobody sees all the prices from all the trades. And therefore the charts from the different brokers are slightly different, making support and resistance a little bit less precise. I then gave several examples of support and resistance. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks trading course. This is the second of five videos on support and resistance.