 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading major trend reversal bottoms. In addition to talking about major trend reversal bottoms, I think it's important again to make the point that there are no perfect trades. And traders who believe that there are will be disappointed as traders because there always has to be a reason for somebody to take the other side. If your trade is perfectly good, then the other side gets a perfectly bad trade and no institution is going to take that trade. This chart has a reversal. Strong bear trend, very tight channel, small pullbacks, just a brief one bar pullback here and one bar pullback here. But we're starting to get pretty good bull bars. We have a bull bar here. We have a very good bull reversal bar here. We have a follow through bull bar and then we have another bull bar here. And then over here, we're getting additional bull bars. All of this buying around yesterday's low and yesterday's close increases the chances that we'll get some kind of a reversal in this general area or maybe a little bit lower. This is a reasonable buy. There's a bear trend, a bull break above the trend line with pretty good bars here. And then we have two attempts to reverse up here, both bars closing above their mid points. This is a possible low of the day and we might get a swing up. It's reasonable to take this buy. When you take a major trend reversal buy like this, you have a 40% chance of a swing up and 60% chance of either a small loss or a small win. A lot of traders just look at this and say, you know, it's pretty good buying pressure. If this is not the low and this is not the low and this is not the low, then the low is probably not much lower. And therefore, they'll use a wide stop and scale in lower. Here we have a double top bear flag and a reasonable place to put a stop is a little bit below a measured move down, which is off the bottom of the screen. Some traders would take this buy and rather than getting stopped out here below this double bottom higher low or below the actual bottom here, they'll use a wide stop betting that the bottom will be soon, if not here. And they'll look to buy more lower. For example, we have a bear breakout that looks like it's failing and reversing up. So a trader who bought here might buy more here. He had a higher low of major trend reversal. Now he has a potential lower low of major trend reversal. I have two problems with this buy. First, there are a pair of reasonably good bear bars. And it's a surprise. The bulls had a reasonable buy. When you get that, you're usually going to get at least a small second leg down. It turns out that this little bar going below that bar was the small second leg down. And rather than buying here, I would rather take the second entry buy here, micro double bottom, down and up and then down and try to go up again. I said that there are no perfect trades. Every trade is a decision. One side is going to get better risk reward and the other side is going to get higher probability. Whenever you're entering and using a tight stop, your risk is small. That means your risk reward is good, but the probability of making money is less. If you buy after a strong reversal, your stop is further away, but the probability of making money is higher. Let's say a bull takes this buy above this bar or above the second entry right here. Lower low major trend reversal. It's a low risk trade, assuming he puts a stop below this low. Even if he buys above here, he'll probably put a stop down here. Low risk, but low risk almost always goes in hand with low probability. If you take that buy or this buy, there's a 40% chance of making a profit that is at least twice your actual risk and a 60% chance of a small win or small loss. Some traders prefer higher probability, and that comes once you have a clear breakout like this. These consecutive bull bars above this high and above this double top and above that high represent the bears giving up. They've decided that the bottom is in and we're probably going for at least two legs up, one pull back two or two. If you buy here, your stop is either here or below these bars. It's further away. You're risking more, but that's the trade off when you're taking a trade that has a higher probability. It's reasonable to buy that close and use the wider stop, greater risk. It's reasonable to take the entry here or here with a tighter stop, but lower probability. If you take either one a hundred times, the profit will be about the same. You can buy that close or buy the close of the follow through bar. Once it's clearly always in the long like this, you can buy for any reason. Buy closes, buy bare closes, buy above bars, get filled here, buy below bars. Bet reversal attempts will fail. I mentioned that when you have a bare breakout like this below a credible bottom, you're usually going to get at least a small second leg down. We have consecutive bare bars closing on their lows. Usually you're going to get at least a second reversal down, second leg down. And the bulls usually need a micro double bottom before the probability is high enough to get a reversal. We're testing yesterday's low, testing yesterday's close. And this is a second attempt at a bottom. The bulls tried to get a bottom here. And now they're trying to get a bottom here and especially here. If ever you're faced with a situation like this, a lower low major trend reversal, but the buy signal bar is not all that good. And it's following a pretty good bare breakout. A lot of traders will wait for a second entry by a micro double bottom and enter here. This has a higher probability of making money than this. If you want higher probability still, you wait for a strong breakout, then we're probably going to get some kind of a measured move up. Maybe based upon the height of this double top bear flag. Instead of breaking below the neckline, we're breaking above the double top and we should go up for at least a measured move. When a trader is looking for a major trend reversal in a bear trend, first he wants a bull break above the bear channel. And he'd like it to be as strong as possible. Here we rallied for about 10 bars and we have gaps below this bar and that bar and the moving average. The bulls were strong enough to put bars completely above the average price. That is a sign of strong bulls. We have consecutive bull bars with good sized bodies closing on their highs. And then we have a third bull bar. This is a sign that the bulls are strong enough to possibly take control over the market. This is not a major trend reversal. We only had three bars up and three or four bars down. This is too small to be a major reversal. So this is probably a minor reversal, but it's strong enough so that if we get a resumption of the bear trend and then another reversal, this could be a major reversal. In other words, this was likely to lead to a trading range or a bear flag. However, this one has a 40% chance of leading to a bull trend. Gap bars, a gap between the lows of the bars and the moving average, a sign of strong bulls. When the bear trend resumes after gap bars, usually you're going to get an attempt at a major trend reversal. We have a micro double bottom. We have a bull bar closing on its high. It's reasonable to buy on a stop above that bull bar and then you get filled right here. This low is slightly above that low. This is therefore a higher low major trend reversal. Remember, every major trend reversal bottom is a variation of a double bottom. Here at the second bottom is slightly above the first. If you take this buy, you can put your stop either below here or below there. It's about the same price. I usually would put my stop below the lower of the two. The risk is small. Therefore, the probability of success is relatively small as well. Most major trend reversals result in the market going sideways and not turning into an opposite trend. 40% of the time though, you get an opposite trend and the reward is many times greater than the risk. And that makes it worthwhile to take these trades. 60% of the time, you get a small loss or a small win. We got a reversal up and then a pretty strong sell off here. We're trying to rally up again and a big tail right here. So now we have a double top and a bear trend. And the premise of a strong reversal is much weaker, much lower probability at this point. And a lot of bulls would get out either below this bull bar or below that bear bar, fearful that we'll break below the neckline of this double top. Double top, neckline and go for another leg down. If you take that short, your stop is either here. This is only a minor reversal. It's a double top, which is good for the bears, but it's a minor reversal. This is more of a major reversal. Has a stronger leg down. We almost got to a new low. The bears will sell either with a stop above the double top or above the top of this lower high. Taking a chance that we're going to swing down. The market sideways for about 40 or 50 bars. Whenever that's the case, there's a 50-50 chance you're going to get a trend reversal up and a 50-50 chance you'll get trend resumption down. And there's always a reasonable sell set up. Here we have a double top bear flag. And there's always a reasonable buy set up. Here we have a higher low major trend reversal. If you want, you can call this a double bottom or a triangle. Three legs down. One, two, three. It doesn't matter what you call it. We're in breakout mode. 50% chance there'll be a bull breakout. 50% chance there'll be a bear breakout. 50% chance the first breakout will fail, up or down. The bulls who buy this have a 40% chance of a swing up before their stop is hit. The bears who sell this have a 40% chance of a swing down before one of their stops is hit. Sometimes the market will go below this low, hit the stop and reverse up. Sometimes it'll go above this high and reverse down or above this high and then reverse down. The bulls who bought here, if they buy above the high of this bar, their actual risk probably is to blow the low of this bar. Because you don't know what took place as this bar is forming. It may have triggered the buy and may have gone back down to that low and then back up. Therefore, the actual risk might be to just below the low of this bar. The height of this brown box. Here's one times actual risk. Here's two times actual risk. If you bought here, the market did not go up for two times actual risk. And that's the minimum profit objective when you take a trade. That's what you need to make the traders equation positive. And that's what you need to have a mathematically valid trade. Doesn't matter if you bought this or if you sold that. And you just rely on your stops and wait for the breakout. Both are equally valid trades. 40% chance of a swing. 60% chance of a small profit or a small loss. 60% chance of a small loss. Some bulls will look at this and say, okay, we rallied to the top of the cell climax. We might be forming a double top with the top of the cell climax. And we could break down below the neckline of this double top and fall for a measured move down. And they might be sufficiently disappointed to exit below the low of this bar. They don't want to pull back. They want the market to quickly go up above a significant lower high. If a trader did buy this and if he did exit because he was disappointed, he can always buy again above a bull bar above these bull bars here above this bull bar here. In general, if I took this by and I saw these three bull bars, and now we have four bars closing just about on their highs, I would not exit there. I would rely on my stop just in case we get a sharp sell-off that becomes a test of the prior low, a test of the bottom, but forms a higher low and then reverses up. Look what happened here when the market reached two times actual risk. There's a reversal. And that tells you that some of the traders who took this by saw that the actual risk was here. And this is two times actual risk. And they took profits here. Other traders said, okay, it's sold off above this high. Maybe we're in a trading range. And if it gets above this high, it'll sell off as well. Some of these bulls will simply change their premise. They were hoping for a bull trend and they don't like this type of price action. The breakout bar here is not all that big. And therefore they exit at this high or as soon as it starts to turn down. Many different reasons for the bulls to exit here and for the bears to sell. They sold at this high and made money, made a scalp. They'll sell at this high hoping to make money. And they might even sell at this high, betting that the breakout will fail and they'll be able to make money. Pretty good bull breakout here. So the bulls who held and relied on their stock now have a reward many times greater than their actual risk. This is one of those 40% of the times when the reward is many times greater than the actual risk. If you take 10 trades like this, you'll get four like this. They will more than make up for the six losses or the six small losses or small wins. The bears who sold here, they either get stopped out above here or above here. Worst case, they put a stop way up here and get stopped out here. This represents the bears giving up and the bulls becoming confident that we're going to rally for a measured move up. For the bulls, this is a strong enough breakout so that we'll probably get at least a small second leg up. We pulled back and this could be the end of the second leg up. This could be the end of the second leg up. It turns out this was the second leg up. Therefore, we have a double top. We went up, we went down, we went up and now we have another sell single bar. It's reasonable for the bulls to exit all or part here. And then we have a potential triangle, final flag. Leg one, pull back to a triangle. And then leg two, a bear bar closing on its low. It's okay to exit there as well. If you're trading always in and you exit here or here, you have to be buying again above a strong bull bar. Here's a bull bar closing near its high. Here's another one. So you'd buy above that bar or we got a double bottom down, up, down. Maybe buy above that bar or above these bars for a second leg up. The bears who did take shorts here, I would not, the channel is too tight. If they did take shorts here, they're going to be exiting on high two buy setups. So high one, high two. So they'll get out there and you can see the final bears who held through all of this, hoping that we would get to the bottom. Hoping that we would get some kind of a top and a reversal down. They gave up here above this bull bar. End of the day. Reasonable to take profits with a minute to go or even seconds to go. We're clearly in a trading range, relatively big legs, and a pullback can be very deep. This is a minor reversal. So probably a bull leg in what will become a trading range. If you're buying for any reason, if you're buying up there or buying down here, you can get many legs that test very close to the bottom of the range. Sometimes it'll even break below the bottom of the range and then reverse up. If you're buying for any reason, it's usually better to use a wide stop below the bottom of the range. Also, it's better to be trading small, especially if you bought high. For example, if you bought up here or up here and your stop is further than you're comfortable having it be, it's better to trade small. You don't want your loss on any trade to be bigger than the loss on any other trade. Some bulls who bought here were really disappointed by the size of the sell-off and the reversal up was not all that strong. They would therefore think about getting out. We have a double top, we have a low two, and they might conclude that it's more of a trading range than the start of a bull trend. And they might wait and enter later, for example, up here or up here. Some bulls who bought here, if they're sufficiently disappointed, will buy lower scaling in and then they'll simply try to get out break even. They might buy here and then maybe buy a point below. And then when it gets back to the first price, get out break even on the first entry and then with the scale profit on the second. In other words, they're changing their premise. They were hoping for a bull trend and now they're getting a continuation of this trading range. And they bought expecting a bull trend and now they've concluded that it's not about to become a bull trend and it's still a trading range. A lot of the bulls will just get out and wait. Different ways to scale in. As I said, if you bought here and you held and you relied on your stock, you might buy more the size of a scalp lower. If you're scalping for one point, for example, you buy here and then you buy more one point lower. And then you decide, am I going to convert this to a scalp and get out break even on my first entry when it gets back to my first entry and with a one point profit here? Or am I going to hold on to my position for a swing up? Or am I going to get out of part of my position here and then I've lowered my entry price? So I bought here, I bought more here. When I get back to my first entry price, I sell and now I'm long from here. Traders can see this as a triangle. We're getting higher lows and lower highs. And now we're getting another entry. We have a small double bottom bull flag. Another bar closing on its high. A trader, if he did get out, he could buy again here arguing. We still have the higher low major trend reversal. And we're also in a triangle and we're getting a lot of bull bars closing on their highs. Pretty good buying pressure. Maybe it's slightly better than 50-50 chance that we'll get the bull reversal. A trader does not take all of these buys. He doesn't buy here, here, here, here, here. He'll take one or two buys. He doesn't want to be accumulating a lot of entries at the same price. Some traders will buy here and buy more as the trend goes his way or buy more as the trend goes against him. But usually he's not going to keep adding on at the same price. For the bulls, we have a higher low. We have a higher low. We have a higher low. We have a higher low. The bulls see this as a bull trend, even though at this point we do not yet have a strong breakout. And after each strong breakout, especially above prior highs, traders will start to trail stops to reduce their risk. We broke out here, closed above the top of the past 20 or 30 bars. It's reasonable to tighten your stop from below here to this higher low here. And after maybe this breakout or this breakout for sure, you'd trail your stop either below here or below here. Another strong breakout. At the end of the day, traders would trail their stop here, planning to get out right before the close. What happens if your stop gets hit? Let's say the market's right here and then the market falls below here or if you had a stop here. What happens? Then you're no longer making higher lows. You're getting a lower low. Your premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. You bought on the belief that you were buying in a bull trend. Therefore, if it falls below a significant higher low, your trade is no longer what you thought it was. And you just get out. You just take the loss. The bull trend needs higher lows, major higher lows. Minor higher lows like this are not important. You can see we fell below that low, yet we still continued higher. But major higher lows are. The market needs to keep making higher major lows. This is common if you take a buy to get a very strong reversal down below the entry price. It traps the weak bulls out and it also traps some weak bears in. They'll say, oh wow, look at that. A big reversal up and down at the moving average. We're getting lower highs. And now we have a follow through bar. But you're selling at the bottom of a 40 bar trading range. That is a low probability bet. More likely bulls will buy these closes and put a stop down here. Betting that the bear leg will be a bear leg in the trading range or in a bull trend. And not the start of a bear trend. The market fell below the entry price. However, the bulls do not want it to be a bear. The market fell below the entry price. However, the bulls do not want it going down below that entry price twice. After the bull trend resumes either here or here, they do not want it to fall back below that price. Usually, if it does, you have to question your premise that it's a bull trend. You can see we dipped below the entry price again here and again here. But this was not a strong enough reversal up yet for the bulls to say that it should no longer fall below the entry price. Maybe here and certainly here. At this point, you certainly don't want it falling back below your entry price. And therefore, when the market breaks out here, you can put your stop here and no lower than below here. I begin by talking about how there cannot be a perfect trade. Major trend reversals have a probability of only 40% that you're going to get a swing trade. A trade lasting 20 or more bars with a reward at least twice as big as your actual risk. Usually many times bigger than your actual risk. I'm Al Brooks. This is the third of four videos on trading major trend reversal bottoms. Thank you for watching The Brooks Training Course. course.