 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching The Brooks Training Course. This is the second of five videos on scalping. I want to make the important point that beginners should avoid scalping. It's just way too easy to lose money. They have to win at a very high percentage rate and that's impossible for a beginner to do. Some scalpers use two timeframes. They look for the setup on one time frame and then they look for an earlier entry on a smaller time frame. Why do you think beginners scalp? It's because it's the smallest risk per trade. They focus on risk. They work very hard to get an account that allows them to trade, hoping to become a profitable trader, hoping for a career change. And they want to consistently make money. They want to make a lot of money. However, they usually start with a small account and they had to work very hard to get that account. And then there are also family pressures, your spouse, your kids. You have to take care of them and you have to be very protective of the money. You don't want to lose a lot of money quickly. As a result, beginners naturally focus on risk. And that's a problem because there are three variables that they have to consider. Risk, reward and probability. Whenever a trader structures a trade, he has to make sure the combination of three variables makes sense. He has to make sure that the trader's equation is positive. That means that the probability of winning times the expected reward has to be significantly greater than the probability of losing times the expected risk. But you hear in that equation three variables, probability, risk and reward. And the problem that beginners have is they focus on risk. They should be focusing on risk reward ratios compared to probability. These are all reasonable scalps. Every red rectangle is an entry price for a short. Every green rectangle is a reasonable scalp buy. This is the E-mini chart. Minimum scalp size one point. You can look at some of these bars and say, well, why would anyone ever buy this closed? We have consecutive bear bars trying to break out below a trading range. And the reason why traders buy that closed is the bears need one or two more bars to take control. They have not clearly broken below the range and they do not have a follow through bar yet. As a result, bulls buy the closed, betting that the bears will fail, knowing that most trading range breakouts fail. Beginners spend too much time worrying about risk. And if you only look at one variable, you're going to ignore the other two variables, reward and probability, and you'll lose money. Because every trade has to have all three lined up in a way that makes sense mathematically. Beginners, they're just very afraid of losing their dream. It's the death of their dream if they lose their account. Or if the account falls to a level that is too small to meet margin requirements. That's called a blown account. Consequently, beginners only look at risk, as I said, and they ignore reward and they especially ignore probability. Consequently, ignore probability. Consequently, the average five minute E-mini chart, the average bar is bigger than a minimum scalp size. Minimum scalp size one point. And that means there's enough room for a scalp on almost every bar. And a really experienced trader can see potential entries on every bar. That does not mean he takes every entry, but it means he sees lots of opportunities. And he only has a matter of minutes, sometimes seconds, to process risk, reward, and probability. And if he feels like he's not satisfied with his conclusion, he does not take the trade. 81 bars per day, five minute chart, E-mini. At least 40 reasonable one point scalps. Most experienced scalpers take between 10 and 20 scalps a day. These are average looking bars in this area. This is 12 ticks tall, maybe a little bit bigger than average. Here, an average height bar, nine ticks tall. And this bar, one of the smallest bars on the screen, is still six ticks tall, which is 50% bigger than a minimum scalp. Four ticks, one point. Even a small bar like this has opportunities for scalpers. For example, after three consecutive bull bars reversal up from the bottom of a range, he'll buy the close. And they'll try to buy more at the low of the bar. They did not get filled. The market tried to get there once, tried to reverse down twice, failed twice, and reversed up. The bull scalper will then take his profit somewhere up in here. It's very difficult to win 90% of the price of scalpers. You win 90% of the trades unless you are willing to use wide stops and scale into your position. Even then, it's difficult to do. But most skilled scalpers are willing to scale into a position, and a lot of them will use wide stops. And by doing that, they're increasing their risk. The stop is further away. They're increasing their position size, which increases their risk as well. Their reward is fixed. They're looking for a scalp in the E-mini. One, two, three points. But what they're doing is, in exchange for accepting more risk, they're getting a much higher probability of success. Remember, probability is the flip side of risk-reward. You cannot have a great risk-reward trade with a very high probability of success. There has to be an institution willing to take the other side of your trade, and that means constantly there's always a problem with either probability or risk or reward. If you're trying to get higher probability, you have to pay for it with a worse risk-reward ratio. The institution taking the opposite side of your trade has to get something in return for giving you higher probability. When a trader scales in, he increases his risk, but he also increases the probability of making money. And that's the main reason why skilled traders often scale in. They'll use wide stops and scale in to increase their probability of success. The market's in a trading range here. On any chart, in general, 90% of the bars are either in a trading range or in a channel. When that's the case, a trader can make money buying or selling at any time, as long as he manages his trade properly. For example, the market is in a tight range, reversing repeatedly in here. The bulls have a pretty good bull bar here and a second good bull bar here, trying to reverse up from the bottom of a range. It's reasonable for a trader to buy on a stop just above the high of this bar, looking for a scalp. But he has to use the stop below the bottom of the range. The market reversed up again, now has a micro double bottom in addition to this double bottom. It's reasonable to buy here if a trader can put a stop down here, just below the bottom of the range. Here's the stop. Many skilled traders will look to buy more, one or two points lower, expecting that the reversal down will fail. Think about it from the perspective of a bear. Does he really want to sell below the low of this bear bar? He's selling at the bottom of a tight trading range where the market reversed up, up, up, probably going to reverse up again, especially given that this bear bar has a very big tail. It's a bad looking sell setup and therefore it's probably a decent looking buy setup. Experienced traders know that and if they bought on a stop above the high of this bar, they might buy more at the low of this bar, scaling into the trade. If a bull did that, he would try to exit break even if the market gets back to his original entry price. And then he'll end up with a 10 tick scalp on the second entry. He buys here, just above this bull bar, buys more at the low of this bar, which is 10 ticks lower. And then when it gets back above the high of this bar, he gets out break even on this first entry and then with 10 ticks profit on his second buy. I want to talk a little bit about trading on two timeframes. Some traders like to find setups on one timeframe and then entries on a smaller timeframe, hoping to get in as early as possible, thereby reducing risk. For example, some traders will look at a 60 minute chart and then when they think they have a setup, they'll look at a five minute chart to see if they can enter with smaller risk. Likewise, a trader looking for patterns on a five minute chart might try to enter on a smaller chart, like a three minute chart, a two minute chart or a one minute chart. In general, most skilled traders trading on the five minute chart will rarely ever use a one minute chart for entries, maybe 10% of the time or less. I talked about this buy setup where traders buy that high scale in more and exit. But I also said that a trader could sell there as well. And if he manages this trade correctly, he would make money. It's a tight trading range. And therefore, if a trader sells and sells more higher using a wide stock, he probably will make money. Let's say he places a limit order to sell at the high of that bar. He'll get filled here. It fell more than two points. He could have scalped out. Let's say for some reason he did not exit. Let's say maybe he was hoping for a swing down. And then we got the reversal here. He then would conclude that instead of a swing down, it's in a trading range. And he's going to switch to scalping mode. No matter what he's doing, if he's taking this short, his stop belongs above the top of the most recent sell-off. Strong sell-off. Three consecutive bear bars. Two of them pretty big. And then he gets disappointed by this reversal up. He might decide that instead of a swing down, it's going to stay in a tight trading range instead. He'll then look to scale into his shorts. For example, sell at the prior high using that original stop. So he sells here at the high of this bar and then sells more at this high as long as it's at least the size of a scalp higher. In this particular case, it's eight ticks higher. So it's two points higher. And that's twice as big as the minimum scalp. Eight ticks is two points. When the market comes back to his original entry price, he can exit break-even at his first sell. And then with a two point profit on the second sell. Remember my 90% rule. 90% of the bars on a chart are in trading ranges or channels. And a skilled trader can make money buying or selling if he manages his trade correctly, which usually means scaling in and using a wide stop. Here's a five minute chart and a one minute chart. This blue area is right here. This is the entire blue area right there. This is the one minute chart. A lot of traders will look for a trend on one timeframe and then look for an entry on a smaller timeframe, hoping to get in earlier, reduce risk. For example, we have two legs down, one pullback two, arguably three pushes down, one and then up and then two and then up and then three and then up. It's reasonable to buy this. It's about a 50% pullback. We have a spike pullback channel. It's a pullback to a slightly higher low. We had about seven or eight bars up without a bare body. And we're pulling back to the moving average. Plus there's a very good looking bull bar. It's reasonable to buy on a stop just above the high of this bar and you get filled right here. One tick above the high of that bar. Looking for trend resumption up. Most traders look at this as a pullback and not the start of a bear trend. And a pullback means you expect trend resumption up. You expect it to become a bull flag. And therefore some traders will look for as early an entry as they possibly can get. For example, if a trader, instead of placing an entry based on the five minute chart, zoomed in and looked at the one minute chart, this area here is this area here. You'd see a spike, pullback, second push, pullback, third push, and then reversal attempt. He would buy above the high of that one minute bar. And he'd get filled somewhere down here instead of up here. This is the entry on the five minute chart. That green box is right here. And a trader using the one minute chart would enter five ticks lower. The same is true with higher timeframe charts as well. Some bull scalpers will look at 15 or 60 minute charts for setups. They look for support and resistance. And then enter on a one minute chart or a five minute chart. In general, I think traders should not be entering on a one minute chart. I think it's perfectly reasonable to look for a pattern, a test of support or resistance on a 60 minute chart and then entering on a five minute chart. I think it's much harder to be trading on a five minute chart, looking for patterns on the five minute chart and then entering on the one minute chart. You don't have much time to make decisions and you'll make too many mistakes and you'll find yourself only looking at the one minute chart and not paying enough attention to the five minute chart. Therefore, most traders should not be doing this with a one minute chart, except in rare circumstances. Remember, the trader on the one minute chart is trying to reduce his risk. If he buys above the high of this bar, he gets filled here. His stop is a little bit below. If he buys on the five minute chart, his entry is here and his stop is further below. Whenever you do something to improve your risk reward ratio, you pay for it with reduced probability. And the one minute chart, it's a less reliable chart. The probability of trading it well and the probability of setups working is lower. For example, here, if you buy above the high of this bar on the one minute chart, you're buying after five bars without a bull body. And three of the bars are bare bars, two closing on their lows. This is not a strong buy setup on the one minute chart, even though it's a wedge. One, two, three, or one, two, three. This is not a high probability buy. Another problem is time. On a one minute chart, you can have a great looking setup become a very bad looking setup in a second or less than a second. Or the opposite can happen. You can have a terrible looking setup become a very great setup in a second or less before you have time to act on it. Also, if you're trading really well, if you're a good trader, you're not going to make significantly more money by going down to a one or two minute chart. If you're trading well, you can make a lot of money on the five minute chart. Very often, at the very final second or two of a chart, a one minute chart for example, the institutions can quickly create a tail, a reversal, or erase a tail. You had a reversal and then it becomes a trend bar in the final second of the bar. For example, look at this bar. It's a strong bear bar closing on its low. We don't know for a fact, but it might have been a bull bar with one tick bull body and a big tail below until the final half second. And then it did that in the final half second. And that does not give you much time to think about what to do next. And if you're a beginner, you're not accustomed to thinking of the exact opposite within a second. You're looking to buy and all of a sudden it becomes a sell, or you're looking to sell and all of a sudden it becomes a buy. And you end up making decisions without giving the decision enough thought. You end up making too many bad decisions and you lose money. There's just not enough time for most traders to make good decisions and then physically to place orders. You have to place your order. You got to place a stop. You got to place a bracket order. You got to make sure you do it correctly. And it's just not enough time. Another common problem with one minute charts is you quickly decide that you're going to buy or you're quickly going to sell. And you're so eager to get in just for that instant that you enter at the market and the order gets filled one or two ticks above or below where you wanted it to get filled. And that means that if you think that profit target was based upon your original entry price and you got filled a tick or two worse, all of a sudden you're getting less reward and increased risk. The math becomes bad. Whenever the math is bad, institutions are going to take your money. You're going to lose money. One guideline that I use is traders should not be trading on any chart that has more than 20 bars per hour. So for example, if you're trading on a time chart, that's a three minute chart. A three minute chart has 20 bars per hour. So I think most traders should not be trading charts less than three minutes, three minute charts. And then the same is true if you're trading on charts based upon ticks or volume. I think you should not be trading any chart where you have more than 20 bars per hour. Very often at the beginning of the day, let's say you're trading the E-mini and you're using a chart that has 5,000 ticks per bar. Early in the day, 5,000 ticks per bar might be 30 or 40 bars per hour. And I think that is too many bars. And I think you should not be trading that. Later in the day, from maybe nine o'clock to 10 o'clock or 11 o'clock, 5,000 ticks per bar could be fine. You may only get 10 bars per hour. And that's another problem with using charts that are based upon ticks or volume. The number of bars per hour fluctuates a lot. And I personally like to be thinking about time. I think all the time about time. And I don't like the bars having a different time before they close. If using a tick or volume chart, sometimes a bar will last a matter of seconds. Other times it'll last 10 or 15 minutes. I like to know when a bar is about to close. When you look at the chart, this one minute chart of the E-mini, it looks easy. But you often end up buying early above bad signals. For example, you might buy above here for a high two. And then you argue, oh, it's a wedge, three pushes, one, two, three. And you quickly buy there. And you use two tighter stop, you get stopped out here. Instead of using a wider stop and looking to scale in lower. A lot of setups just don't look good enough. And you have very little time to make up your mind. And a lot of times you'll take the trade and not use a wide enough stop. And you get stopped out. And then the trade goes your way. That's another common problem with one minute charts. You can end up losing money buying in a bull trend. For example, let's say you buy above the high of this bar. And then you got a bear bar, a bear bar closing in its low. Another bear bar closing in its low. Three consecutive bear bars you may end up exiting. And it turned out to be a bull trend. And the same with here. You can end up losing money selling in a bear trend. You sell below a low two here. And then you get a reversal and you exit here. Or you exit here above your entry price. Beginners have very little time to decide. And they see a wedge. One, two, three. I got to buy. There's a small II. Maybe it's an II. Small final flag. Triangle up, down, up, down, up. And maybe we'll go up a wedge with a triangle final flag. Maybe I'll buy above that bar. But it's just really too easy to make bad decisions. And you end up taking trades where the probability is too low. And you do not use a wide enough stop that would allow you to increase your probability, especially if you're able to scale in. Let's say you buy it on a stop above this bar. You get stopped out below its low. You end up losing five or six ticks on that. Even though the market ended up going up. When an expert trader take this by arguing wedge, one, two, three. Probably not. But again, even an expert trader does not have much time to make the decision. He would be ready to buy, but he would like to be buying above a bull bar. Or he'd like to be buying at the close of a big bull bar or in the follow-through after a big bull bar. If he did buy this, he would probably use a four or a five point stop and look to scale in lower. Instead of getting stopped out below the signal bar, he might buy more below the signal bar or at the low of the signal bar using a three or four point stop, betting that the bear breakout would fail. If he's looking to buy on the five minute chart and he sees this as a probable bull flag, a bear leg and what will become a bull flag, he's going to be willing to use a wider stop. Again, as you can tell, I'm recommending not using a one minute chart. An experienced trader who does look for the early entry in the one minute chart will use a wider stop, four points, five points, maybe six points, depending on the size of the day's range. And he probably would be willing to scale in lower. How far a stop? Well, we have a reasonably good bear breakout here. So maybe use a stop just below the measure move down. Here's the measure move down. Maybe put a stop just below that. It might be two or three points down below the original entry. I made the important point that beginners should avoid scalping because it's just too easy to lose. They'll focus only on risk and they'll ignore probability and reward. They'll especially ignore probability. And whenever you trade, you have to consider risk, reward and probability. If you only look at one of the variables, you are going to lose money. And then finally, traders sometimes like to use two timeframes. They look for a setup on one timeframe and then an earlier entry on a smaller timeframe. While it sounds good, for example, trading on the five-minute chart, looking for an early entry on the one-minute chart, I think most traders who do that will rarely do it. And it rarely ever significantly improves their profitability. If a good bull scalper takes 10 or 15 trades a day, he might do that once a day. And the rest of the time, he'll simply rely on a five-minute chart. He might dial down to a two or three-minute chart occasionally. But he's going to base most of his trades on the five-minute chart. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on scalping.