 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of three videos on trading climactic reversals. Some climactic reversals lead to changes in trend, and I call those major climactic reversals. And then I also want to talk about a climax based upon time more than price, a microchannel. A major climax is a big breakout late in a trend. Because these climaxes can result in an opposite trend, I'm calling them major climactic reversals. Remember, every trend bar is a breakout. Every trend bar is a climax. Depending on context, I may simply call a trend bar a trend bar. I may call it a breakout. I may call it a reversal. If it's one or more big trend bars occurring 20 or more bars into a trend, there's a 60% chance it's going to lead to a climactic reversal, which usually means a trading range and sometimes an opposite trend. At a minimum, when you see a big breakout late in a trend, here a bear trend, here a bull trend, you have to be thinking about exiting your trades in the direction of the trend and considering trades in the opposite direction. If you sold for any reason, and then you see a breakout here, a pair of bars, the biggest pair of bear bars pretty much since early in the trend, especially after a trading range, which might be the final flag, you have to be thinking that it might be a climactic end of the trend. If you see a reasonable reversal here, a pair of bull bars following the bear breakout bars, it's reasonable to exit at least part or all of your trade. If you want a high probability trade in the opposite direction, you wait until you get a strong breakout in the opposite direction. We're trying to reverse up here, not all that strong, it still might be a bear flag, but then we get a breakout and a follow through bar. Some traders like to wait for a strong breakout with follow through and then enter because then the probability is higher. However, the later you enter, the further the stop is and that means the risk is greater. That's always the case, whenever you wait for a higher probability trade, your risk reward profile is going to be worse. Climaxes often lead to reversals, especially if the context is good for a reversal. Here we have a bull trend, we have a good bull breakout, and we have three pushes up, one, two, or two, and then three. And then we have the biggest bull bar occurring about 20 bars into the bull trend. Also, it might be simply a buy vacuum test of the high. Whenever you see a particularly strong bull bar, 20 or more bars into the trend, it might be a measuring gap, 40% chance it'll lead to a strong trend up, but 60% chance it's going to be an exhaustion gap. Here we have a follow through bar, good for the bulls, but then look at the next bar, a bear bar closing below its midpoint. A lot of the bulls will exit below that low, and a lot of the bears will go short, thinking that it's more likely an exhaustion gap. The gap at this point is the low of this bar and the high of the breakout point. 60% chance we're going to get a reversal down to that level. Probably a 60% chance we'll get a reversal down to the bottom of the buy climax. Since this looks like a trading range, we went down, we went up, we went down, we went up, we may get a fairly deep reversal. Parabolic wedge, one, two, three, and we're getting a bull breakout above a bull channel. Typically fails within about five bars. And when you get a dramatic breakout late in the trend, the first target is the bottom of the buy climax. And then if it keeps going down, the next target is a measure move down based upon the height of that buy climax. After a strong breakout like this, a lot of bulls will raise their stop. It's a major higher low. And if the bull trend is good, it should not fall below a major higher low. If it reverses down, it should form another higher low, if the bull trend is still valid. If it's no longer a bull trend and has evolved into either a trading range or a bear trend, it probably is going to fall below that stop level. And therefore, if you're holding long at this point, let's say you bought for any reason. If you're holding long at this point and you did not exit here, a lot of bulls will get out below the bottom of this buy climax. Because at that point, they know it's no longer a strong bull trend and they were holding long on the premise that it is. When the context is good, there's a 60% chance of 10 bars and two legs sideways to down. First target, the bottom of the buy climax. Here, a very tight channel. Is this leg one pullback leg two? Probably not. When the channel is very tight, it's usually the first leg down. And then we have a pullback and then a second leg down here. When I see a bar like this, especially with that tail on top, I'm either looking to sell that bar or getting ready to sell within a bar or two after that. Or below the low of the follow up bar. I would not sell below that bull bar typically because it closes on its high. But once you see a bear bar closing below its midpoint and having a reasonable sized body, a lot of traders are going to sell. They're going to sell at the market. Some of those are bulls who bought for any reason and others are bears expecting a test down here and maybe a swing down. For the bears, it is a possible second leg trap. This is really a two legged first leg up. Is it a second leg trap? Is it one pullback? Two. Whenever I see a strong breakout in what might be a trading range, I always think that it might be a second leg trap. Here it's a third leg up, but it's still basically the same principle. The market is going from trading range behavior and trying to break into a trend. Most trading range breakouts fail and therefore when you get a strong breakout near the top of a trading range, it's more likely a second leg trap trapping traders into buying too high. If I'm long and I see we're up here, I might take profits on the close of either this bull bar or the close of that bull bar. More likely I'm going to sell out of longs on the close of this bar or below the low of the bear bar. And bears will do the opposite. Some traders, instead of waiting for their stop to be hit, once they've seen three decent bear bars with one or two of them having decent sized bodies closing below the mid points, they'll just sell at the market. Or here you have a bull flag, we have a high one bull flag, but after three decent bear bars and a buy climax and only a doji buy signal bar, chances are there are sellers above for at least a small second leg down. A lot of bulls who did not exit on these closes or on the close of the bear bar or below the bear bar, once they see the three bear bars, they're going to exit on the close of the bear bar or above the high of the prior bar and they'll get out here. The bulls are hoping this is a strong breakout and it's going to lead to a measured move up, either based upon the height of this leg and then a measured move up or based upon the height of the entire rally and then breakout and measured move up. And the bears see this as a climactic end of a leg in what is probably a trading range and they expect a test down to the bottom of the bull breakout, the most recent major higher low, and possibly a measured move down toward the bottom of the range. At this point, if you're a bull, your stop is here, here's your risk. If you're a bear, you're expecting the market to fall below the bottom of the buy climax. So that's the reward for the bears. Some traders will take the short, let's say sell that close and risk for a measured move up based upon the height of the buy climax. And therefore, this would be the stop right above here for the bears. And the bulls see a breakout, they expect a measured move up. So that's their reward. The bulls and bears both have identical risk and identical reward. But what's different? Probability. An exceptionally strong bull breakout late in a bull trend, especially when it's not above the top of the trading range, is more likely an exhaustive end of the trend than the start of a new stronger leg up. Therefore, if you say probably as a trader, that means you're at least 60% certain. And therefore you believe there's a 60% chance that the market is going to come down here before it's going to go up there. The risk and reward are equal, but because the probability is at least 60%, it's reasonable to take the short. That makes the trader's equation positive. Again, the profit target is a test at or below the bottom of the bull breakout, the buy climax. Again, since the probability favors the bears, all they need is a reward equal to their risk to have a positive trader's equation. In fact, this is their initial risk. For the trader's equation, all you need is the actual risk. And therefore, if a bear is sold, let's say at this close, their actual risk was just one tick above the high of this bear bar, which is very small. And if they exit down here, that is several times greater than their actual risk. And that definitely makes for a very positive trader's equation. Stop just above the measurement of up. If you have pretty good contacts and a pretty good sell signal bar, you do not have to risk that far. You can simply put your stop above the top of the bear bar, the sell signal bar. The bulls might get one more leg up, and therefore this is a higher probability stop. And that's always the case. Whenever you use a wider stop, you're increasing your risk. You're also increasing the probability of making money. Both are reasonable putting a stop here or putting a stop here. If you put your stop above the bear bar and you get stopped out, you would sell again on a reversal down. Once you get a pretty good reversal down, for example, three consecutive bear bars, if your stop was here originally, you would move it down to above the top of the new bear swing. Usually when you get these breakouts, it's one or two bars, not three or four bars. And traders know that, and especially with this tail on the top of this bar, a lot of traders will simply sell the close of this bar. The bulls sell to get out of longs, and the bears will sell to get short. What's more likely? A bull trend becoming a bear trend or a bull trend becoming a trading range? Well, probably a bull trend becoming a trading range. And therefore, a lot of the bears will scalp out at least part of their profit until they're comfortable that the market has become always in short. Most climactic reversals result in trading ranges. And then once the market's in a trading range, then it often forms a reversal, a major trend reversal pattern, like a lower high major trend reversal that can result in an opposite trend. And because a trading range is more likely after a climactic reversal than an opposite trend, traders should think about scalping at least part of their trade, unless the reversal seems relentless. For example, here we have three bull bars, four bull bars, five bull bars. You have to be thinking that the bulls are taking control and the market is always in long. Once you believe it's always in long, then it's okay to swing your entire position, not just, for example, half of your position. And the same here. If you're thinking about scalping out around this low and you see three consecutive bear bars, the market's always in short and we're probably going lower. And therefore, it's not as important to scalp out part of your position. If the market stabilizes and tries to reverse up, then you could scalp out. Again, it's always reasonable to take partial profits at the bottom of the most recent major higher low, the bottom of the buy climax. If the market does break below the bottom of the buy climax, you have to be thinking about a measured move down. The way I look at this is when the market gets down here, the bulls are hoping to form a double bottom. A lot of times it just keeps going down as it does here. But theoretically, the bulls are hoping to form a double bottom and then break above the neckline and rally for a measured move up. If the market breaks below this low, then it's breaking below at least a theoretical double bottom. And therefore, you have to be thinking about a measured move down. And this is a good area to take profits, especially after a big sell climax. Also, you're low in the trading range. The market gapped up here. It rallied here. It rallied here. We're in that general price area. And remember, after the buy climax, you were looking for two legs down, one pullback, two. You're still in the trading range. And anytime you see a very strong breakout, a second leg in a trading range, you have to be thinking it's more likely a second leg trap than the start of a strong bear trend. Sometimes you hear people talk about a V bottom or a V top. Sometimes they'll call it an inverted or upside down V top. But those are rare. They sometimes happen on some very unexpected news event, but that's very rare. Almost always whenever you get a pattern that you think is a V top or a V bottom, it's something else. And there are clues that the market's going to reverse before the reversal takes place. With a true V top or a V bottom, there are no clues. The market just suddenly reverses. And look what we have up here. We have a parabolic wedge top and we have the test of the high of the day. This very strong breakout late in a trading range day is more likely a buy vacuum test of resistance than it is an acceleration up into an even stronger bull trend. Every buy climax is a test of resistance, even if it's not obvious. And every sell climax is a test of support, even if it's not obvious. This is a test of this low and of the bottom of a trading range day. And this is a test of the top of the trading range day. And it's also an attempt to break above the top of a very tight bull channel. And the top of the channel is resistance. This is a bear trend. And whenever you get an unusually big bear bar occurring 20 or more bars into the bear trend, it's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend than the start of an even stronger trend. Here, the trend began here or here. Certainly this leg began here about 20 bars back. And look at this bar, closing on its low, opening on its high. Very big bar, probably the strongest looking bear bar in the entire trend. Also, it's a second leg down. We have a trend here, a breakout there, and then a pause. And this is an attempt to resume down into an even stronger trend. This is a possible final flag. 60% chance this is an exhaustive end of the trend and the beginning of a trading range. 40% chance it's going to result in a measured move down. At the close of this bull bar, we have a gap between the high of the bull bar and the low of this pair of small doji bars. And therefore, the bears are hoping that this bear bar is the start of a strong trend down and this becomes a measuring gap for a measured move down. Either from maybe the top of this most recent leg down, maybe from all the way up here. 60% chance that's not going to happen. 60% chance the market's going to close, get above the breakout point below these lows, and get to the top of the sell climax. When the channel is very tight like this, the first reversal up almost always is minor, which means the market will test back down. And once you get the test back down, you start to develop a trading range, you can get a major trend reversal. This is a high or low major trend reversal, but this is a very tight bear channel. Usually that results in another minor rally and the bulls will need some kind of a double bottom before they can get a reversal up. At this point, it's a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal with a good looking bull bar. This is a reasonable buy for a swing up. Very strong bear bar, no tails top or bottom, and it's the best looking bear bar late in a trend beginning here or here. Once you see a strong breakout like that, its high is major. The bears believe the market is still in a bear trend as long as the market does not rally above a major high. If it rallies above a major high, the bears then believe the market is no longer in a strong bear trend. It's either in a trading range or in a bull trend. If it's in a trading range, they'll sell. Here they have a double top bear flag and they sold, but the bulls also had a potential higher low major trend reversal and the bulls bought and the bulls won. Reasonable for the bears to put their stop above the high of this bar because if they're selling like a sell the close bear trend, they want the trend to keep going down. And if it does not, then their premise is wrong. It's no longer a strong bear trend. And this tells them that it's no longer a strong bear trend. Every reasonable stop is a magnet. And therefore, if the bulls get the reversal, they're going to try to get up here. Look at this bear bar and look what followed it. A bull bar closing on its high. Most bulls will exit above the high of that bull bar and not rely on their stop. A lot of bears will either buy that close or buy above this bull bar or they'll wait for two or three bull bars and then buy minimum target the top of the most recent sell climax. At the close of this bar, what is more likely? That we're going to fall down here, a measured move, or go up to the top of the sell climax? Well, given the context, I would say 60% chance this is going to be a climactic reversal, an exhaustion gap that we're going to get back up above the top of that bar, especially after this pause, a potential small final flag. And therefore, a trader buying this close has a 60% chance of the market getting here before it falls that same distance. He'll put a stop just below. A bear selling that close has only a 40% chance of the market falling here before it gets up there. Risk and reward equal for the bulls and bears, but there are problems for the bears. In addition to a very strong sell climax, probably a climactic end of the trend, it's also around a measured move. The bears have a double-top bear flag, neckline, fell for a measured move. And if you connect these lows, we're at the bottom of a channel. That is another type of support. So support at the measured move, support at the bottom of the channel. This might be a sell climax testing support and the end of the trend. Not necessarily the beginning of a bull trend, but the end of the bear trend and the conversion into a trading range. And then once in the trading range, the bears will try to get a bear flag, like a double-top bear flag, and the bulls will try to get a reversal. Here, a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. At the close of this bar, you have bulls and bears trading. The bulls have a 60% chance of going up here before falling that same distance. The bears only have a 40% chance of falling that distance before hitting a stop above the high of this bar. Exhaustion gap, more likely than a measuring gap. So rather than some kind of a measured move down, more likely it's an exhaustive end of the trend and will get up to the top of that final sell climax. A lot of bulls will buy that close, betting that it's an exhaustive move and they'll put a stop beyond the measure move down. Higher probability to buy a reversal up, especially above this bull bar and getting filled right here. Because the probability is high for the bulls, all they need is a reward equal to twice their risk. Their initial risk is here and their reward is here. This is a reward equal to one times their initial risk. The trader's equation is based upon actual risk. And if a trader bought above high of this bull bar and got filled here, the actual risk was only right here. The move up here is probably at least twice their actual risk and that clearly is a positive trader's equation. Again, the bulls who buy here stop a little bit more than a measured move down and reward at the top of the sell climax. They can take partial profits here. If they thought the market was clearly always in long, they could hold for a swing. However, after a very tight bear channel like this, the first reversal up is minor, which means the best the bulls will get is the trading range. And once in a trading range, then they can get a major reversal. I want to talk a little bit about micro channels. Micro channel means that the high of the bar is below the high of the prior bar, below or at the high of the prior bar. Look at the chart. There's time here and there's price here. Every move is a combination of price and time. Some climaxes are based upon simply price. The market falls very far. But other climaxes can be based upon time. The market does something for a very unusual number of bars and that becomes unsustainable. Do you think this could go down like this for a hundred bars, 500 bars, a thousand bars? No, of course you do not think that. And therefore it's unsustainable. And anything that's unsustainable is climactic. And that means that the bears will take profits and the bulls will start to buy for scalps. Whenever you have a bear trend that has persistent strength, 20 or 30 bars into the trend, you're probably exhausting the bears. And they're probably going to start taking profits. For example, at this point, the stop for the bears is way up here. And that is a lot of points for the bears to risk. And they're going to try to reduce their risk. And one way to do that is by beginning to take profits. And as the bears take more and more profits, the bear trend weakens and it starts to evolve into a trading range. When you get a breakout like this, you say, well, there's a doji bar here, pretty much a doji here. The bear breakout bars are not all that big. Bad follow through here. That's all true. It does not look particularly strong on this timeframe. But on a higher timeframe chart, like a 15 minute chart, this would be a series of very strong bear bars. And because it's a very strong breakout on a higher timeframe chart, on the five minute chart, traders should only be selling. Sell closes, sell anything, sell at the market. 18 bars without the high of a bar going above the high of the prior bar. At some point, no one's willing to sell. And the bears will begin to take profits and they'll sell pullbacks, but they will not continue to sell in the bear microchannel. The market will have to go higher to find traders willing to sell. Whenever you have any kind of a climax, an unsustainable move, you have a 70% chance of 10 bars, two legs occurring fairly soon. In this particular case, we have about 10 bars, two legs sideways to up. We went up, pull back and then sideways. So we had at least two legs, one pull back two. We actually had three or four and sideways for about 10 bars. And that's the minimum objective after any kind of a sell climax. 10 bars and two legs sideways to up. What are the chances of a big bear breakout and an even stronger trend down? Only 30%, probably even less. I think it's important to remember that even though this sell off lacks consecutive big bear trend bars and is not especially strong on this timeframe, it is strong on a higher timeframe chart and bulls should not be buying. They're not going to make money buying. However, bears will be buying to take profits. And once you start to evolve into a trading range, then bulls will start to look to buy. We have the first pullback in a micro channel. High probability that the market is going to go down at least a little bit further. And therefore, it's a reasonable short, either below the low of this bar or below the low of this bear bar closing on its low. However, because this is climactic and the market's probably going to start to pause, go sideways to up a little bit, a lot of these bears will scalp. If a bear sold here and did not scalp out at the new low or anywhere down here, they'll probably buy on the reversal up. They don't have to. It's still probably only a minor reversal because the channel is still very strong. You only expect a major reversal after the bulls have had a pretty strong minor reversal. And this is a pretty strong minor reversal. And therefore, bulls will look for a major reversal here, a higher low major trend reversal. This is a final flag reversal. And a trading range is more likely than a bull trend. It's reasonable to take the buy. Looking for a test of the sell climax, which is the most recent major lower high. But this entire trend is very tight, very small reversals. And therefore, the market's still making minor reversals and a bull trend is unlikely. A trader buying here is probably going to be scalping out around here, betting that a trading range is more likely than a bull trend. But once you get the trading range and once you get a very strong minor reversal like this, bulls will begin to look for a swing up. For example, a higher low major trend reversal. Sell climax, sell climax, sell climax here, three more bars, another sell climax. This is a series of sell climaxes. At some point, the bears get exhausted. They buy back their shorts and then they wait for at least a couple legs up before selling again. If you want, you can call it a wedge. We have a low, a reversal, a low, a reversal, a low, and another reversal. I know it doesn't look like a wedge, but anytime you get three legs down that reverse, you have to be thinking that it's a type of a wedge. I think this is a reasonable buy. Looking for a test of here, maybe up here. A microdouble bottom, bulls could buy above this bull bar as well. Good context for a test up to these lower highs. If they buy above here or above here, a reasonable stop is below the low of this buy signal bar. Some bulls will buy here and they'll buy more below this bull bar, betting that the market is starting to transition into a trading range. For example, once they see that the bulls have bought this low and scaled in lower, made money, they're going to assume buying at this low or lower will make money. And if it falls below this low a few points, it'll reverse up as well. So some bulls, rather than exiting just below the low of this bar, will buy more, betting that the market is in the process of transitioning into a trading range. And in a trading range, you want to buy low, not sell low. If you did exit down here and then you get another reversal up, the bulls would buy again. A reasonable place to take profits. You're testing the tops of the lower highs in the bear trend. And you've had one, two, three, four, a low four short. We tried to top out here. We got a breakout and then a wedge. One, two, three. So it's a type of consecutive top pattern. Again, it's probably a trading range and the market is probably not going to fall all that far. Another thing good for the bulls here is this channel is so tight, the odds are a reversal down is minor and the bulls will get at least a small second leg up. And therefore they'll look to buy this or above this bull bar for a major trend reversal. I said you can call this a low four. I used to use that term a lot and now I view it as consecutive tops. We tried to get a bear flag here and instead of trading down, we got a breakout and then we got three legs up. One, two, three. Even though it is a low four, low one, low two, low three, low four. I think of it more as consecutive tops. We have a complex top, low one, low two, and then a breakout and then another complex top. Low one, the low two did not trigger and then low three did. Higher low major trend reversal. A tight bear channel, a micro channel lasting about eight bars or so. A lot of bulls will wait for a second entry buy like above this bull bar. A very small pullback bull trend. Pullbacks was for a couple of bars, one bar, one bar here. Very strong bull trend. But look at it. Are there any exceptionally strong breakouts? We have breakouts, but are they the biggest, strongest, most dramatic bars on the chart? They are not. And therefore, the market is not getting exhausted. There's no exhaustion, no exhaustive buy climax. Even though we're getting reversals on a higher timeframe chart, like a 15 minute chart, there probably are no pullbacks. It's probably just a series of bull bars closing in their highs. If not the 15 minute chart, then certainly the 30 or 60 minute chart. It's a very strong series of big bull trend bars closing on their highs. And you should only be buying. You should not be selling here. You cannot make money selling. If you sell for any reason, you're going to lose. You have to assume that every reversal is going to fail. Even up here, even though it's a little bit climactic here, parabolically climactic, the first reversal down is probably minor and will result in a trading range. Even though I would not buy at that low, I would wait for a pullback closer to the moving average. If you did, the odds of losing money are small because the first reversal down almost certainly will be minor. The bulls will buy it and we'll get a test back up to that high. Many breakouts in the bull trend, but they're not particularly big. And therefore the bulls are not especially exhausted. And therefore the bulls will keep buying. Here's a weekly chart of the E-mini. And we have 11 consecutive weeks with bull bodies. Can we get a thousand consecutive weeks with bull bodies? No, not realistically. At some point you're going to get a bare body. This has never happened before in the history of the E-mini. 11 consecutive weeks with a bull body. And therefore it's unsustainable. Can you get 12? Can you get 13? Can you get 14? Well, it's never done that. So it's unlikely that you're going to do it. And therefore it's unsustainable. And anytime something is unsustainable, it's climactic. Even though the bars are not particularly big, it is a bi-climax. On a higher timeframe chart, like a monthly chart, it might be three or four big bull trend bars. And it might be a dramatic bi-climax on the monthly chart. But on this chart, it's not made of extremely big bull bars. And therefore there's not much exhaustion. But it is unsustainable. And the odds are it's going to pull back into a trading range pretty soon. And therefore bears will sell. Like for example, maybe they'll sell above the high of this high one bull flag after that bear bar. We have a bear body here. We have a bear body here. And we have an exhaustive bi-climax, parabolic wedge, one, pull back two, pull back three. We're probably going to get a couple of legs down. And therefore bulls will start taking profits like above that bear bar. And bears will start selling like above that bear bar. Or here we have a micro double top with a big bear bar closing on it slow. The bears might sell for a second leg down. Again, the odds of this becoming a bear trend are small. The first reversal down probably will be a bull flag. The best the bears can probably hope to get is a trading range. So the reversal down is probably either going to be a bull flag for a resumption of bull trend or a trading range. Alright, so here's a monthly chart of the E-mini. We have one push up pull back, second bi-climax pull back, third bi-climax. This is therefore a tight channel with three pushes up. And I call that a parabolic bi-climax or parabolic wedge top. It's also around a measured move up based upon the height of this trading range. This is probably going to evolve soon into a trading range or pull back or a trading range. Here, 38 months without touching the moving average. That has only happened in the cash index twice in the past 50 years. Do you think it's going to go 39, 40, 50, 60 months without touching the moving average? Probably not. Once you start to do something that the market has done only once every 25 years, it's probably not going to do it much longer. And therefore the odds are it has to get down to the moving average fairly soon. In 1987, the market was above the moving average just like this for 38 months. And then the market crashed. It fell 26% in one day. And then in 1997, the market stayed above the moving average for 44 months, but then fell 22%, a very big correction. And therefore you have to be concerned that whenever the market is doing something extreme, the correction could be very deep. Tight bull channel all through here. You can only buy. You cannot sell. Pullbacks only lasting one bar, one bar, one bar, one bar. So you can only be buying. But at some point, once you start to get to a number of bars that has only rarely happened, a lot of traders will switch from buying at the market to buying pullbacks, like down to the moving average or reversals up. Here we have a double bottom at the moving average. I began by talking about major climactic reversals, extreme behavior that results in an opposite trend. And then I talked about how you can get a climax based upon bars that are small if you have a lot of them in a series, a micro channel. A buy climax or sell climax based upon time more than price. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of three videos on trading climactic reversals. Public reversals This is strengths-based purposes like Ray's measuring software for allluses and sensors as well.