 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on losing because of mistakes. A common problem with beginners is they do not use the correct stop. They tend to use a stop that is too tight. Also, scaling in is a dangerous thing to do, especially as a beginner. It can lead to very big losses. Beginners, when they do scale in, they don't realize how small they have to trade. Invariably, they trade to larger position and they can't handle the stress of the market going against them. And they end up exiting an otherwise good trade far too early with a loss instead of holding and making a profit. When you're trading, the appropriate stop is usually pretty obvious. If you look at the chart and you know where the stop is, but it's too far away, either you have to trade very small or do not take the trade. It's perfectly reasonable to not take trades. If for any reason you cannot take the trade, if the stop is too far, if emotionally you're distracted, you simply don't take the trade. There'll be plenty of other trades. If you are in a position in your swing trading, you hold onto the position until there's a clear opposite signal or some other strong reason to get out of the trade. You rely on your stop and you can trail your stop when the market goes your way. It's always good to take partial profits at support and resistance targets. Also, you should get out of the trade if there's a reasonable signal in the opposite direction. For example, let's say you sold anywhere in this box. The stop is obvious. It's at the top of the bear swing. It doesn't matter if you sold here or if you sold here. The stop is right there. Here we have a couple bear bars, good sized bars, a breakout bar, follow through bar. The market should not get above this high if it's in a bear trend and therefore it's reasonable to tighten your stop here. This is still the major lower high, but it is reasonable to tighten your stop here. If the market pulls back, goes above it and you get stopped out, you can always sell again. At this point, we have three legs down and therefore a wedge and we have a micro double bottom. We went up on this bar and down on this bar. If we go above the high of this bar, then we have a micro double bottom and a wedge. The channel down is tight. The reversal is probably minor, which means either a trading range or a bear flag, but it's okay to get out here, especially if you sold up here. You have a reasonable profit. You have a reasonable excuse to get out. You can also take partial profits and hold on to the remainder of your position. If you're in a swing trade, you need a swing stop. If the trade looks bad, either get out or rely on your stop. Beginners are always afraid to take losses because they focus on losses and they're worried about being a loser. All beginners are losers and it hurts emotionally. It hurts to take losses. And therefore beginners hate taking losses and they often do not take losses when they should. Let's say a beginner buys this reversal up, hoping that the leg up is strong enough to have a second leg up. So he buys looking for possibly a swing up. If he takes the buy, his stop is down here. He has a wedge bottom, a couple good bull bars. He might get a second leg up. Here he has a small, high or low, major trend reversal. But at this point, he does not know that. All he knows is a wedge bottom. The market is starting to get flat. The trend is getting less steep and he has a decent reversal up. If he buys here and then he sees this bear bar and another bear bar, a lot of times the beginner will get afraid because he'll think, uh oh, maybe this is a bear flag and the market is simply going to continue down. And let's say he's debating what to do in here and he's not fast enough to put his stop below this low. Then what does he do? He has a swing stop down here. It's reasonable to rely on it. This is a problem that a beginner often faces and he looks for a compromise. He realizes that he could have gotten out early. He bought this close, a disappointment bar. He could have gotten out around break even here and he chose to take a chance that maybe it'll go up. Instead, it starts to go down. He chooses not to use a tight stop because he does not want to take a loss. He's thinking that, well, I don't want to rely on the swing stop either because the loss will be too big. Even though when he put the trade on, he decided this was an acceptable size loss. And therefore he'll look for something in between. He did not take the early loss. He's afraid to take the full loss, even though it's still not too big of a loss. So he looks for some other place to put a stop in between. He says, well, this is a bull bar. It's a breakout bar. Maybe I'll put my stop below the low of this bar. And that's a mistake. We're in a tight bull channel here. There's no reason to get out below the low of this bar. Either you get out early or you rely on your stop. And what happens is the beginner gets stopped out. He sees this big bear bar and he panics. He's happy to get out. He's relieved to get out. And he's unable to buy again above this bull bar. He misses the big trend that he was anticipating when he bought originally. This is what I call a skunk stop. It's in between two reasonable stops. A skunk in the middle of the road is going to get killed. And if you start using skunk stops between two reasonable stops, your account is going to get killed. The minimum profit that you need to trade based upon the traders equation is at least two times your actual risk. And that has to be at least a minimum scalp size. Minimum is rarely ever the best thing to choose in life. Having a goal of making the minimum wage is rarely ever a good choice. And going for minimum profits when trading is rarely ever a good choice. If a trader buys anywhere in this green box, he knows his stop goes here. If he gets stopped out and it reverses again, he can always buy again. If he gets to the top of the market, he can always buy again. Here we have four consecutive bull bars. We have a breakout bar, a bigger bull bar, and a follow-through bar. And we're breaking above this lower high. Reasonably strong breakout to a new high. It's reasonable to trail your stop up from this low to below this low. Getting late in the session, we have a bear bar after a bi-climax bar. Around a 50% pullback. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Nested three pushes up. One, two, three. Reasonable to take profits here below that bear bar. Nested wedge and around a measured move target. We have a gap between this breakout point and this pullback. And the measured move projection is right there. Lots of good reasons to exit here at the end of the session. Let's say you look at this sell-off. Eight bear bars. And you think it's a bad buy setup. So you sell at the high of this bar and you get filled right here. It doesn't matter where you sold, your stop is above the top of the bear leg. If this stop is three times bigger than your usual stop, then you have to trade one-third your usual size. If you cannot do that, then don't take the trade. If a beginner is afraid that his stop is too far and he's worried about his loss, he'll make bad decisions and he should not take the trade. For a trader to become consistently profitable, he has to consistently make good decisions. The beginner, if he took this short, which is a reasonable thing to do. We have a give up bar, we have a follow through bar. We could be getting a spike and channel down. He might be panicked by this bull bar and get out above his high instead of relying on a stop. However, after eight bear bars, the first reversal up is probably minor and the best the bulls probably will get is the trading range. And the bears will probably still get at least a small second leg down. Now, why would the beginner get out above this bar? Because he lied to himself. He said he was going to rely on a stop, but he had no intention of relying on that stop. He was afraid of too big of a loss. He was never willing to risk that much money. And as soon as the market went against him, he got out. He sold, hoping the market would go immediately his way. That was his plan. Even though he told himself his plan was he was going to rely on a stop. Alternatively, if he held, he was so afraid of this bear bar. Now he's thinking this might be a climactic end of the move. He'll scalp out for a minimum scalp. Beginners do that all the time. They're in a good swing trade and they're so happy to have any profit because they've lost so many times in the past few days that they'll grab a minimum scalp. Very often it'll be a positive traders equation. So mathematically, it's an acceptable thing to do. However, it's rarely a good thing to do because you're going to make mistakes in life and you need occasional swing trades to offset all of your little mistakes. If the beginner is really worried about losing too much money, he simply has to trade small. I talk about the I don't care size. You trade so small that you really don't care if your stop gets hit. That way there you'll focus on doing what is right. Traders need experience doing what is right and not simply focusing in on risk. The traders equation has three variables. Beginners always focus on risk. They ignore probability and they ignore reward. This trade is a good trade for a swing and it has a potential for a big reward. If you trade small, you're not going to get rich. However, you can practice doing the right thing. And once you get experience doing the right thing and you consistently do the right thing, then you can start trading bigger. And eventually you'll have a decent shot at becoming rich. Also, you do not have to trade big volume to get rich or make a very good living. I've known traders over the years who trade relatively small position sizes, but they trade extremely well and they make a lot of money. I've heard from many traders over the years that they're surprised by how much money they're making simply by doing the right thing. Scaling in is for experienced traders. It's very easy for beginners to lose far more than they ever imagined if they're scaling in incorrectly. The purpose of scaling into a trade is to increase your probability. Whenever you improve your probability, you always weaken your risk reward situation. Typically, you're increasing your risk. One of the biggest mistakes that beginners make is they scale in without greatly reducing their position size. They end up losing far more than they ever dreamed possible. And part of that is because they never dreamed that the market would go against them and hit their stop. Only experienced traders should scale in. Because an experienced trader will know if his trade is still valid. And if he thinks it's no longer valid, he's not going to scale in. He's just going to get out and take a loss. A beginner will not admit that his premise is no longer valid. And he'll keep scaling in hoping that the market again goes his way. And he ends up taking frequent big losses. It's a terrible combination to be scaling in and being hopeful. It needs to be objective. One big loss can easily wipe out 10 or 20 good trades. And it will take 10 or 20 other good trades to make up for that one big loss. Everybody knows that you scale in to increase the probability of making money. However, beginners think that they can scale in. Invariably, they have an unrealistic plan. They're not willing to take the loss because the position size is going to be too big when they enter their position. And they start seeing how fast their losses are growing. Even if the trade is still valid, they'll be shocked by how fast the losses are growing because the position size is too big. We have a bear trend, a bull breakout, a higher low, major trend reversal. And now we have four bull bars with increasing body sizes. The market's accelerating up. Therefore, it probably will go higher. Bulls will buy thinking that either the market goes up and they make a profit, or this is a bull leg in what will become a trading range, and they can buy more lower expecting it to come back up here. And then they can make a profit on their lower entry and get out break even on their first entry. By the close bull trend, we have a six bar bull micro channel, no bear bars and six bars. Yes, we're still below a prior high. So this might be a bull leg in a trading range, but it's a reasonable buy. It's a strong enough rally so that the odds are bulls will buy the first reversal down. However, remember, at this point, you don't know if this is the start of a bull trend, or if it's a test of the top of the trading range, and it could be followed by a deep pullback to below the bottom of this buy climax, the breakout, but above the bottom of the bull trend. A lot of the bears see the six bars up and the four good bull bars, and look at that and see a lot of momentum, and they wait for a second entry short. In other words, they'll wait for a micro double top or wedge top before looking to sell. When you look at this, where should you put your stock? You see two obvious choices. The bottom of the breakout, down here, or the bottom of the bull trend, down here. Both are reasonable. If you use the tighter stop, you're going to get stopped out more often, but lose less. If you use the wider stop, you'll get stopped out less often, but when you lose, you'll lose more. If you take the tight stop and 10 trades like this, and somebody else takes the wide stop, after 10 trades, you'll have about the same amount of money. Both are reasonable, and therefore you can use either one. If it goes down below this low and reverses up, you can always get stopped out and buy on the reversal up. Let's say a trader is willing to scale in two more times for a total of three entries. Therefore, you have to make each entry about one third of your normal position size. If you're using this stop, or this stop, whatever your position size is for either of these stops. If you're thinking about you might scale in if this sells off and becomes a trading range, you have to trade extremely small. Beginners can't do that. Either their account size is small, and their position size is small already, and they cannot reduce their position to one third size. Or, they simply think the position size then would be so tiny that it's not worth taking the trade. The result is the beginner ends up taking too big of a trade, and he doesn't realize how bad he'll feel emotionally if it's starting to go against him, and he adds on to his position, and the rate of his losses accelerates. If your stop is twice your normal stop, and you're thinking of entering two more times, in other words, tripling the size of your position, then you have to trade one sixth of your normal size. And if you cannot do that, you don't take the trade, or you use a different plan. For example, don't scale in. What you could do is you could buy here, wait for a pullback, and then buy more above a reversal bar. That's a common approach. One concern that you have to have when you're in a possible trading range is a second leg trap. Sometimes you'll get a weak first leg, and then a very strong second leg, but it's not breaking far above all the bars to the left. Therefore, it could be a bull leg in a trading range instead of a measuring gap leading to a new bull trend. Beginners only see the six bars up, and they think that it's going to be a successful breakout. The bull bodies are good, but they're not particularly big, and they have tails on top. So this is not all that strong. And look at all of these bars. Every bar has tails. That means this might be part of a trading range. If you have a lot of bars with tails, that is trading range price action, and a rally like this could be simply a bull leg in a trading range. Beginners only see this, big bull bars, and they think bull trend. And they don't see this. We're not above the top of the bars to the left, and this could simply be a buy vacuum test of the top of a trading range. And then you get this. Let's say you buy that close, and you see this bear bar. It's two legs up. We're still below the bars to the left, the top of the bar to the left. This could be a second leg trap in the trading range. Most traders, if they have a strong breakout like this, and a possible trading range, and they see a bear bar closing on its low like that, it's better just to get out below the low of that bar. Because if this is a second leg trap, we could sell off very deeply in the trading range before we get a leg back up. If you do hold long, and plan to scale in, you either rely on your stop here or on your stop here. If you get that bear bar, and then it trades below that bar, I would not be scaling in at a fixed number of points or pips below. I would wait until we get a reversal up, and then buy more above the bull bar. Assuming I did not get out below that bear bar. I typically get out below that bear bar. A failed breakout, two legs up, still below the top of the bars to the left, still in a trading range, or possibly even a broad bear channel. We have a lower high. When you look at this, you say, well, it's got to go up. No, it doesn't. There's always a reason to take the opposite side of the trade. The bears think this is just two legs up and a broad bear channel, and that we'll get a lower high and then a new low. It's reasonable to think that. And then after this bear bar closes on its low, it's reasonable to sell below this bar, betting on two legs up in either a trading range or a broad bear channel. It's a reasonable short. Strong enough rally so that the first leg down probably will be bought. But if this whole thing is a leg in a trading range, that first leg down could be very deep and it could even fall below the bottom of this breakout. This is a reasonable buy the close bar. That means that we should get back here within the next 10, 20, maybe even 30 bars, but we should get back here. This is a disappointment bar. This is a disappointment as well. A lot of the bulls who bought here are hoping it comes back to this close so they can get out break even. Otherwise, if it keeps going down, they're trapped. Experienced bulls will get out below that bear bar or on the second or third consecutive bear close if there are three bear closes, or they'll rely on their stop here or here and look to buy more lower. This is a breakout above this high, but it's not a breakout above the top of the trading range. Second leg traps trap traders into buying high. Trap traders into thinking that this is the start of a trend. That's the whole idea of it. But unless the breakout is far above all the bars to the left, you have to be thinking that it could be a second leg trap, trapping beginners into buying momentum that has not yet broken above all the bars to the left. It could simply be a test of the top of the trading range. Bull breakout above this high, but terrible follow through. And therefore, traders should conclude it's still in a trading range. For the moment, although this could be the start of a bull trend, it's also a bull leg in a trading range, or a bull leg in a broad bear channel. It's still below this high. I think it's reasonable to get out below that bear bar. You do not want to see a breakout and then have the follow through bar be a bear bar closing on its low. It's usually better just to get out below that low. If we go sideways here, you can always buy on a reversal back up. But too much risk that this is a bull leg in a trading range and that we might test all the way down to the bottom of the range. Some traders exit below the first bear bar. Others exit below the second. Others exit if we get three consecutive bear closes. Beginners, all they see is momentum up. All they see is a bull argument. They're not thinking about the possibility that this is a bull trap. A lot of beginners will think, okay, I'll buy. I want to increase my chances of winning. I know the size of minimum scalp. I'll add on the size of a minimum scalp here. And then two times the size of a minimum scalp here. I'll get out break even if it gets back to my original entry price. The beginner does not see the opposite argument. He only sees the momentum. But momentum alone is not enough reason to buy. Has the breakout broken above all the bars to the left? In which case, maybe it is a bull trend. Or is this possibly a bull leg in a trading range? Momentum up is good. At the close of this bar, there's a 60% chance we're going higher. At the close of this bar, there's a 50% chance we're going higher. And 50% chance second leg trap. And as you start to get more and more bear bars, the probability is we're going to get lower. The bears who take this cell have maybe a 40% chance of a swing down. But their risk is small and the reward is at least twice as big as their risk. So it's reasonable for them to take that short. And this is what we got. A huge stop run below the higher low. Yet, look at the follow through after this big bear bar. It's breaking below an important low. But look at the follow through. It's the opposite of this. Strong rally, bear bar. Strong sell-off, bull bar. Terrible follow through. Terrible follow through. We got a reversal. An experienced trader who took this buy would not buy more below that bear bar or below this bear bar. He would wait until there's a bull bar and then buy more here. Knowing that, buy the close bulls were reasonable to buy this close. And if you do something reasonable and trade appropriately, scale in appropriately, 90% of the time you can either avoid a loss or make a profit. Experienced traders, if they bought this close and did not exit here, would buy more above a good bull bar here. And then wait for the market to get back to their original close, get out break even at that close, and then with a profit here. You can see the selling that took place here. A lot of that selling is from bulls getting out of their original position. And the smart ones bought more here and they ended up getting a profit on their second entry. If you get stopped out, let's say you use the tighter stop and you get stopped out, you simply buy again above this bull bar. It's hard to do. It's hard to get stopped out with a big loss and then go right back in and buy. But if you're thinking about scaling in, when you put on that trade, if you get stopped out, you buy a double position here, which is what you would have had if you bought here, relied on this stop, and then bought more above this bull bar. Bulls betting that this is not a high or low major trend reversal anymore, but maybe this is a higher low major trend reversal. It sounds easy, but difficult to do, and therefore beginners should not be doing this. Experienced traders can sit calmly and do the right thing, but beginners will not. They'll panic and take losses all day long. This blue box 5 minute chart is the same as this blue box 1 minute chart. Another mistake that beginners make is they'll put a trade on using one time frame, and then because they're afraid of loss, they'll exit using a stop based upon a smaller time frame. Sell the close bear trend. Therefore, traders are selling any of these closes. Nobody's going to sell all of them, but a good trader is going to try to sell at least one or two of them. On the 1 minute chart, it's a very tight bear channel. And these are the entries from the 5 minute chart. That's this entry, and then this is the next one. These are where you'd be getting in if you were selling closes on the 5 minute chart. If you're taking a trade on the 5 minute chart, don't exit on the 1 minute chart. The profits on the 1 minute chart will be too small to offset the losses. This is where you'd exit on the 5 minute chart. It's a sell the close bear trend, so you're looking to exit above a bull bar, or 4 or 5 ticks or 4 or 5 pips above any bar. This is a bull bar, reasonable to get up above that high. If you took any of these sells, this is where you'd get up, and you'd end up with a good profit. Beginners who took any of these sells are probably scared that it's falling quickly, and it may reverse up quickly, and they'll be happy to have any profit. The beginner who took this sell on the 5 minute chart, which is right here, if you look at the 1 minute chart and he sees this bull bar, he'll very often panic, thinking it's a reversal, ignoring 7 or 8 or 9 consecutive bear bars, and he'll get out there. If he sold here, he gets out with a loss. If he sold here, he gets out with very little profit, and he misses a huge profit. If he took this trade on the 5 minute chart, he needs to manage it on the 5 minute chart. He cannot switch to the 1 minute chart and get out on a 1 minute reversal, which is a common occurrence if you're in a good trend on the 5 minute chart. The 1 minute chart is always going to be reversing. It's really important to use the correct stop, and the correct stop is usually obvious. And if the correct stop is far, you have to trade small. If the stop is so far that your risk is bigger than on other trades, simply do not take the trade. Scaling in only for experts. Beginners scale in to increase probability, but they don't realize how greatly it increases their risk until they're in the trade and it starts to go against them and they add on to a losing trade. Beginners should never scale in. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on losing because of mistakes. казine or in thejangles