 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on actual risk. I want to begin by talking a little bit about the Trader's Equation and what I mean by risk when I talk about risk and reward. In particular, I want to talk about actual risk and contrast to initial risk. A trader should only take a trade if he believes the probability of success times the potential reward is greater than the probability of failure times the risk. That is the Trader's Equation. For example, we have a bull trend, about a 50% pullback, a slightly higher low, a high 2 bull flag, one leg down, pullback, second leg down, and a decent looking buy signal bar. It's a very deep pullback. We have four consecutive bear bars, but it held above the bottom of the bull breakout right here and above the bottom of the bull trend right here. It's reasonable to put a stop either below the bottom of the bull breakout. If this is in fact a bull trend, the market should not fall below this low. It's also reasonable to put a stop below the bottom of the bull trend down here. Let's say you did buy above the high of this buy signal bar and you got filled right here and you put your stop below the bottom of the bull breakout. Your risk is from your entry price, just a little bit above the high of this bar, down to your stop, which is just a little bit below the bottom of this low. This is how much you're risking initially. Different traders have different stops. Some traders might have a stop down here. Other traders might use a stop based upon money. For example, 10 or 20 pips or 10 or 20 ticks. Every trader has a different idea of where his stop should be. And therefore there's no widespread agreement on what the initial risk is. When you take this buy above the high of this bar, some traders will get out below this bar. Some traders will get out below this bar, this bar or this bar. Other traders will use money stops. There's no agreement on what the initial risk is. Each trader has his own idea of how much he's willing to risk initially. Based upon what you're willing to risk, you can come up with a reasonable profit target for the trader's equation. You need the math to support the idea that this is a good trade. You need, again, the probability of making money times the size of your profit target has to be greater than the probability of losing money times the size of your risk. Is the probability of making money 60% or higher here? It might not be. It's probably less than that. In general, if ever you are uncertain that the probability is less than 60%, you should go for a reward that is at least twice your risk. Here's your risk. Here's your risk. The size of this brown box, just above the high of this bar, down to your stop. This is two times your risk. If you take this buy and put your stop down here and exit with a profit up here, the math is good. The probability certainly is better than 40%. As long as the probability of reaching this goal before hitting your stop is at least 40%, it's reasonable to exit right there. It would result in a positive trader's equation. For any reasonable trade, it's always good to exit at two times your risk. The math is always good. It always results in a positive trader's equation. So, in general, if you're not certain where you should take profits, try to take profits at two times your initial risk. That always results in a positive trader's equation. For most traders, it's reasonable to exit at two times your initial risk. You bought above here. Here's your initial risk. If you try to exit at two times your initial risk, the trader's equation will be positive because the probability is probably at least 40% that it'll go up here before it goes down here, given that you're buying a pullback and a bull trend. As I said, there are many choices for an initial stop and therefore there are many possible initial risks depending on the trader and which stop he chooses. For example, you can put a stop below the buy signal bar, below the bottom of the bull breakout, below this higher low after this breakout, or below the entire bull trend. Those are all reasonable price action stops, putting a stop based upon the price action, below prior lows, for example. Other traders will use a stop based upon a measured move. For example, the height of this sell climax, a measured move down. It should not fall below this low if you're going to have a profitable trade. Some traders will use that as a price action stop, a stop based upon a measured move. From this high to that low, measured move down, stop just below. Or from this high to that low, and a stop just below the measured move projection. Other traders like money stops, risking a certain amount of money, a certain number of ticks, a certain number of pips. For example, this might be 20 pips or 20 ticks below your entry price. All of these are reasonable stops, and different traders will use different stops, and therefore everyone has a different initial risk. The trader who bought above the high of this bar and used a stop here, that's his initial risk. The trader who has a stop below here, his initial risk is all the way down here. We have a bull breakout and a follow through bar. Now the probability is we're going at least a little bit higher. Here we have a strong breakout. We have five consecutive bull bars and a close above the prior high. Once you see this or this, traders will raise their initial stop to below the most recent major high or low. Once we get a breakout to a new high, it's a bull trend as long as it remains above this low. If it falls below this low, the market then is either in a trading range or in a bear trend. In which case, you don't want to be long here because you bought this based upon the premise that you're in a bull trend. All of these traders who have stops down here, once the market gets here or here, will tighten their stop to just below the low of this bar. At this point, everyone agrees where the stop should be below the most recent major high or low. And now everyone sees how big the deepest pullback was after the entry. If you bought right here above this buy signal bar, the deepest pullback was maybe to the low of this bar, maybe to the low of this bar. Once the market is up here, you can look back and say, where did I have to have my stop to minimize my risk and not being stopped out? Where would have been the absolute best stop on this trade in hindsight, looking back? Where is the smallest stop that I could have used and not be stopped out? Where is it that I could have a more stock? It's not that much. It depends on how big the trader.' To think of what we're talking about, you do kaleidoscope. You don't know that until the market has gone your way. How much did you really risk on the trade? The bulls bought here above the high of this buy signal bar. You have a strong breakout here or all the way up here. At some point, you're going to raise your stock. But in any case, once you have a reasonably strong breakout, you know how much money you had to risk to stay in the trade. When the market is here, if you entered right here above this bar, the tightest stop that you could have used was right below the low of this bar. So the actual money that you risked on this trade was from your entry price to this theoretically perfect stop, which you did not know existed until the market went your way. Once the market is here and you look back, this stop is probably the tightest stop that you could have used that would have avoided you being stopped out of your trade. From your entry price to that stop just below the low of your entry bar, that is how much you actually had to risk on this trade. Your initial risk might have been here. It may have been here. It may have been here. Different traders use different stops, and therefore their initial risk was different. But every trader who bought above the high of this bar, at this point, knew that his actual risk was just too below the low of his entry bar. All of the traders, no matter where their original stop was, now know that they only had to risk this much in hindsight. Here we have a high two bull flag. We have a bull trend, high one bull flag, a high two bull flag. A reasonable initial stop is below the bottom of the bull breakout, maybe below the bottom of the bull trend. Let's say you put your initial stop here, below the bottom of the bull breakout. Then your risk was from above the high of the entry bar, where you got long, down to your stop, just below the low of that bull bar. The market pulled back, did not quite reach your stop, and then it went your way. However, once the market did this, a strong breakout above your entry price, you now have a good idea of what you actually had to risk to stay in the trade. All you had to do was risk to below the low of this bar. If your stop was just a little bit below that bar, that's all you needed to not have been stopped out. It's less than your initial risk. You did not know that this was the perfect stop until the market went your way. But once you were up here and you look back and you say, what was the smallest stop that I could have used and not have been stopped out, it's one tick or one pip below the low of this bar. So right here, this is your actual risk, your entry price to that theoretically perfect stop. Actual risk, entry price to the perfect stop. And any trader who bought here or anywhere through here, once the market is up here, he can look back and say, this is a major higher low. His actual risk was to just below that low. And it doesn't matter where he bought through here or anywhere in here. It doesn't matter where his stop was. At this point, the actual risk for any of these bulls is just below the low of this bar. You have to get out at some time. So you have to have a logical plan to take profits. As I said, there are many choices for an initial stop, which generates the initial risk. And therefore there are many possible profit targets. If you're using initial risk to generate your profit target. However, once the market starts to go strongly in your direction, you know where the perfect stop had to be. And therefore, you know what your actual risk was. And that's true for any trader who bought anywhere in here. His actual risk was to just below the low of this bar. The bull who bought above this bar, this is his actual risk. Computers often use actual risk to create profit targets. So for example, computers who bought above the high of this bull bar for a high two bull flag, if they put a stop down here initially or a stop down here, they did not get stopped out. They held long despite this pullback below their entry price. Once the market started to go their way, they would generate profit targets, many of them using actual risk. Their actual risk is the height of this blue box down to where the perfect stop was. And therefore, one times actual risk is the top of this blue box right there. Since they're buying in a reasonably good bull trend, many of them will get out with a profit that is equal to one times their actual risk. It was a reasonably high probability trade when they put it on. It became lower probability after this pullback. Most traders would be happy to take at least partial profits once the market went as far as they actually had to risk on the trade. And you can see what happened when it got up to one times actual risk. It sold off. When it got up there again, it sold off again. That tells you that a lot of computers used actual risk to generate a profit target. Whenever you're taking a trade where the probability is high, in other words, you're fairly certain you're going to make money, the probability is at least 60%. Otherwise, you would not be certain. The math is always okay to go for a profit target that's equal to one times your actual risk. However, it's always good to go for two times your actual risk. Sometimes it's unrealistic. If you bought here and you were disappointed by the size of this pullback, a lot of traders would simply try to exit at one times actual risk. On any trade, the math is always good to go for a profit of two times actual risk. Here we have profit taking at one times the actual risk. And that tells you that computers are taking profits there and they took them again up here. And that tells you that exiting at one times actual risk in a high probability trade is a reasonable thing to do. Profit targets lead to pullbacks and therefore they are resistance in a bull trend. When the bulls take profits, the bulls are selling, the bears are always selling. The bears know where the profit targets are as well and they'll sell up here as well. In a bear trend, where you take profits in a bear trend creates support. The bears buy back their shorts. The bulls know where the bears are buying back their shorts and the bulls buy there as well. You usually get some kind of a bounce. The bulls take profits here. The bears know the bulls will take profits there. So some traders will sell for a scalp at that profit taking location for the bulls. Some of the bulls have bought here will buy more lower above a bull bar. So they'll add to their position right here. As long as they believe that the market is still always in long in a bull trend and that it will go higher, they'll continue to add on lower, especially above bull bars. As long as the second entry is at least the size of a scalp below the first entry. Many traders who bought here and bought more here, they'll take profits when the market gets back to their first entry. They get all break even at their first entry and then with a scalp on their second entry. And you can see the hesitation when the market got back to their first entry price. When you look at any chart, 90% of the bars are in a channel or a trading range. And that means the probability is not especially high. And therefore, a reasonable minimal reward is always two times actual risk. If the actual risk is too small, a lot of traders will go for a reward that is two times initial risk. Two times actual risk always results in a positive trader's equation. And since initial risk is almost always at least as big as actual risk, if you go for two times initial risk, that will also always result in a positive trader's equation. Let's say a trader saw a bull trend, a 50% pullback, and they bought above the high this bull bar. Their idea is either it's a pullback in a bull trend or a pullback in a trading range. Maybe the market will simply go up to that high and go sideways. In either case, it's a reasonable buy. And let's say he puts a stop just below the low of his buy signal bar. Then his initial risk is from his entry price here to his stop just below his buy signal bar there. As I said, the math is always good to take profits at two times actual risk or two times initial risk. Here, here's one times initial risk right here. And here's two times initial risk right here. Therefore, it's mathematically reasonable to take partial or full profits here if you bought there and put a stop here below your buy signal bar. We have a breakout here, a pullback, and a strong buy climax. If you're buying this close, you need a wide stop, either below the buy climax bottom or below the bottom of the bull trend. Let's say you buy that close and you're disappointed by this, but your premise of a bull trend is still valid in your mind and you rely on your stock. The market starts to go your way. Actual risk is from your entry price, which is buying this close, to just below the low of the pullback. This is the size of your actual risk. You bought a strong bull breakout. 60% chance you'll get a move up that is at least as big as your actual risk. This is your target up here. Here's your actual risk from your entry price to your stop. That's how much you actually had to risk. This is a reasonable target. One times your actual risk and a high probability buy. The bulls tried to get to that target here and failed. They tried strongly to get to that target and failed again. What do you do? I would exit longs since the bulls twice tried to get to their target and were unable to get there. And we have two decent bear bars. The market traded below. And if the market goes below here again, a second time, it's a second entry sell, maybe for a wedge. One reversal down, two reversals down, three reversals down, and now a second entry. It's reasonable to get out here, even though the market did not reach your target. Your premise is no longer valid. You bought what you thought was a bull trend. And now we have a wedge top or a double top. The market is a bull trend. I began talking about the trader's equation and risk. There are actually two kinds of risk. Initial risk, the distance to your stop. Everyone has a different stop location. And therefore, everyone has a different initial risk. Once your inter-trade and the market strongly goes your way, you can look back and find out where the perfect stop had to be. Where would you have had to have a stop so that you would not get stopped out? That is your actual risk, from your entry price to the perfect stop. I'm Al Brooks. This is the first of two videos on actual risk. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. tacita borers clear that you can't believe on your entry price. I'm having a metrosorry, right? Go! We will do this in our country again. Let's go to mascots now. In the next video we have. This is best we are watching the fast track of today's prediction and what's мест omemitism that this doesn't point out in.