 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on swing trading examples. In this video, I'm going to give a series of examples on how to swing trade for day traders. This line is the over-end of the day. I always look to the left and you can see yesterday the market was in a tight trading range here and again here. That tells me that today probably will have a lot of trading range price action. We have a reversal up, reversal down, reversal up, down, up. And today is beginning in a way that is similar to that. Markets have inertia. They tend to continue what they're doing. And on today's open, we're continuing all of the reversals and tight trading range trading of yesterday. We have a sell off on the open and we have a pair of bear bars, but then a bull bar. Another pair of bear bars and then two more bull bars. A bear bar, a big reversal attempt, and it failed. It reversed down. All the way down, we're getting bear bars and bull bars. We're getting a lot of overlap over here and over here. There's an absence of consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows. There are no clear good sell signal bars. We have a bull bar and went down, a bull bar, down, bull bar, bull bar, bull bar. These are bad looking sell signal bars. We have a lot of overlap. The tails are fairly prominent on all of the bars. This looks like it's probably a bear leg in a trading range day. And when you get an open like that, the market usually continues down for two or three hours like that. And then it goes the opposite direction, a bull leg in a trading range. And because of that, traders look for a swing trade up. Most traders should wait when they see the market behaving like this. Expert traders will scalp. They'll sell below for a scalp. They'll buy above for a scalp. They'll sell bull closes near the moving average. They'll sell above a bear bar, a weak looking buy setup, betting that will go down. At some point you conclude that a trading range is likely, and therefore traders will look for a bull leg in the trading range, a reversal up. Three pushes down, one or one, and then two and three. We broke a little bit below the line, and we're reversing up. And then we got a bull bar closing on its high and another bull bar closing on its high after a wedge bottom and a probable bear leg in a trading range day. Bulls are looking to buy a reversal up. They can buy early here or here. Stop down here. Microdouble bottom. We went down and up and then down and up. Reasonable to buy above the neckline of that microdouble bottom. You get filled above the high of this bar. Or buy the close of the follow through bar here. On this day we have a big gap down, but a reversal up. But look what followed this big bull bar. It has a tail on top and it's followed by a doji bar. We have a second bull bar, but a smaller body and again a bad follow through bar and then a four bar sell off. Reversal up, bear bar. Reversal up, sell off. This does not look like the start of a bull trend. It's probably a bull leg in what would become a trading range or it's probably a rally that will test resistance and lead to a swing down, a bear trend day. Big reversal up. Minimum objective would be a measured move based upon the height of that bull breakout. That would take us here around the moving average. The bar after the bull bar is not a bear bar. That absence of a bear body is minimum good follow through for the bulls and it means that will go at least a little bit higher. Maybe a measured move up, maybe a test of the moving average. But look at this rally. One leg up, a reversal. A second leg up, pull back. Third leg up. This looks like a wedge rally around the moving average. And it's also around a 50% pullback from this high to that low. And we have a gap bar. A gap between the low of this bar and the moving average in a bear trend. All reasons to be thinking about a possible reversal down. You can also call it a spike in channel bull trend. Spike, pull back, second push, pull back, third push. Or first push, pull back, second push, pull back, third push. Bears are looking at this as a weak rally. Probably a bull leg in a trading range day. Or simply an opening reversal rally. A rally on the open that reverses down at resistance. A 50% pullback and around the moving average. The bears are looking for sell expecting either a trading range day. A sell down to the bottom. Or possibly a bear trend day. A decent bear bar. Wedge 1, 2, 3 or wedge 1, 2, 3. 50% pullback. Traders will sell below the low of that bar. And they'll put a stop right above its high. Fairly tight channel. A low probability trade. But the risk is small. And the reward is many, many times greater than the risk. So it's a reasonable short. Some traders prefer a higher probability trade. And they'll wait for three or four consecutive bear bars. With one or two of them closing near their lows. And then they'll sell the close of the bear bar. Now it's a higher probability bet that we'll go at least a little bit lower. Again, stop above the top of the wedge. And at this point we've had nine bars without a pullback. Nine bars where the high of every bar is at or below the high of the prior bar. Chances are we're going to go at least a little bit lower. And therefore bears will sell at the high of the prior bar and get filled here. Another reasonably high probability short. Stop above the top of the bear reversal. After this series of bear bars. Six or seven consecutive bear bars and a wedge top. Stalling at the moving average. Traders will look to sell reversals down from bull reversal attempts. Especially at the moving average. The bulls are trying to reverse. Bears expect it to fail. They'll sell below the low of the prior bar. Bulls trying to reverse. Up to the moving average. A double top. Up, down, up, down. They'll sell below that bar. Another bear breakout. The bulls trying to reverse again. The bears will sell. Another low one bear flag. We have a strong breakout here. Three or four consecutive bear bars. Bears will start selling closes. Betting that the market will go lower. Here's the open of the day. And yesterday there was a lot of trading range price action. Markets have inertia. And they tend to continue what they were doing before. You always look to the left to get an idea of what the right will look like. While the bears have a good breakout bar in the open. The bodies are getting smaller. Three consecutive bear bars. And the tails are becoming bigger. And now we have a couple more dojis. Here we have five consecutive dojis after the sell off. This looks like a continuation of this kind of a price action. And it increases the chances that we'll get a lot of trading range price action. At least for the next hour or two. Here we have trading range price action for about 70 bars. Early trading range price action after trading range yesterday. Chances are we'll have at least an hour or two of trading range price action today. That means if we go down we'll go up. And if we go up we'll go down. You can look at this as possibly a wedge bull flag. Reverse up. Reverse up. Reverse up. Possible low of the day. Not a high probability buy. You can also look at it as a big high two. Leg one. Reversal up. Leg two. Reversal up. But we have four dojis. Here we have five dojis. Not a particularly good buy setup. Probably sellers above and we'll go sideways. The market reversed up and started to reverse down with this bar. This is a double top bear flag just below the moving average. After a gap down it's a reasonable sell for a possible high of the day. And it became the high of the day. However you had to sit through a lot of sideways bars before you got the final swing down. If you want you can call it a triangle. Reversal down. Reversal down. Reversal down. And this would be a triangle sell. Again below the moving average. There's a lack of conviction on the part of the bears. We have a series of bear bars but getting smaller bodies. A bear bar here and then a bull doji. Bear bar here and here but then a bull reversal. This is probably going to be a bear leg in a trading range. It's still a possible high of the day and it turned out it was the high of the day. Many bears would buy this. We have a gap down. We reversed up from below yesterday's low. Yesterday's low. And now we have a second reversal up from below yesterday's low. With a good buy signal bar. That's a reasonable buy for a possible low of the day. A lot of the bears who sold here will get out. A lot of the swing bears will hold short. Keep their stop above the high of this bar or above the high of this bar. And then just wait to see if we get trend resumption down later in the day. Bulls are buying this looking for a possible low of the day. Stop below this low. The bears now have another low. A failed breakout above the moving average. They'll sell again below here. A double top at the moving average. You can call it a wedge. Push up, down, up, pause, up, pause, up. Four pushes up. Three or four pushes up makes a wedge. A double top lower high at the moving average. We're still always in short. The bulls could hold long as well betting on the low of the day. And you can see they got a higher low here. And it was only over here that the bulls finally gave up. The bears have a reasonable short. The bulls have a reasonable buy. That tells you that the market's going to go sideways. The probability slightly favors the bears because we have a gap down and most of the trading is below the moving average. But it's reasonable to be long, taking a chance on the low of the day. It's reasonable to be short, taking a chance on the high of the day. Most traders would not swing trade. They would just sell, get out, or buy and then get out. If you are swing trading from the short side, we're getting lower highs. We keep failing at the moving average. You sell every reversal down from the moving average, betting that the bull reversals will fail. Small low 2. We went up and down, up and then sell below that bear bar. We have a low 1, low 2. Sell below that bear bar or below that bull bar. And you can call this a low 1 or a low 2. Up, pause, 2. Double top is always a low 2. We're trying to reverse up here. Small double top there or double top here. A bear bar. Look to sell. None of these is a high probability short, but the math is still okay. Everyone wants very clear trading. Most days are not clear. While this is extremely tight, it gives you an idea that most days are not as easy as they appear to be. And you tend to spend a lot of your time taking small trades that do not go very far. The bears are betting that every reversal up will fail. So every time there's a bull close near the moving average, they'll sell the close here. They'll sell more here. They'll sell more here. Betting against the bull reversal. This is the same chart. Again, a gap down consecutive bear bars. Therefore, always in short. But you can only sell if you can make fairly quick decisions. Here we have a pair of bear bars. But then what do you do once you see bull bars? Instead of a series of strong consecutive bear bars, now we're trying to get a reversal. A lot of bears are disappointed by this and they'll buy back their shorts above the high of this bull bar. Or simply at the market around their entry price. Expecting at least a small bounce. Possibly a low of the day. If you do take that short and you trade it as a swing trade, you keep your stock above the high. Until there's a clear strong reversal. It was a trend from the open bear trend. Here we have a gap down and then we enter the tight trading range. A lot of dojis, prominent tails, small bodies, and sideways with multiple reversals. It's in a bear trend. Therefore, it's breakout mode. When the market's in breakout mode, 50% chance you'll get a successful bear breakout. 50% chance you'll get a successful bull breakout. 50% chance the breakout will reverse. And that's what happened here. We have a bear breakout. We have a bear breakout. It only lasted two bars and it reversed up. If you want, you can call it a triangle. Three pushes down. One, two, three. I simply call it a tight trading range. We have a bear breakout with consecutive bear bars, but a big tail. And then an eye-eye. A lot of hesitation after the breakout. This triangle in a bear trend might be the final bear flag. And it could be the low of the day. This does not look like the start of a strong bear trend day. Where are the consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows? Where is the good follow through? This is terrible follow through. We're breaking out. 50% chance the breakout will fail and reverse off. And this will be an exhaustion gap. 50% chance the bear breakout will succeed and will fall for some kind of a measured move. Maybe from this high to this low. And we'll get a gap here. A small eye-eye, so it's a small breakout mode pattern. Bears will exit above. And bulls will buy for a possible low of the day. Not a high probability buy, but the risk is small relative to the potential reward. So it's a reasonable trade. Some traders prefer higher probability. We have a reversal up here. We went above the top of the final sell climax. And now we have a high two bull flag. High one, high two, or high three. And a decent bull bar. Bulls will buy above the high of this bar. Or they'll wait for three or four bull bars closing in their highs. And then they'll buy closes. And then they'll buy bear closes as well. Betting the first reversal down will fail. It's a by the close bull trend. And you can call this a spike, pullback, second push, pullback, third push, pullback, fourth push. So a spike and channel bull trend. Now you look to the left and you say, huh. The open of the day is right around the middle third of the day. And we're around a measured move up from the low to the open. This could be a trading range day. Also, even though we have a strong reversal here, this is not great follow through. We do not have consecutive big bull trend bars closing on their highs. And we're not above all the bars to the left. This could be a bull leg in a trading range day. Sixteen consecutive bars where every low is at or above the low of the prior bar. That is unsustainable and therefore climactic. And therefore, we might get a pullback fairly soon. Because of the possibility of a trading range day, a lot of the bulls will exit below the low of this bear bar or they'll wait for two or three bear bars and then exit. Again, the same chart. This rally could simply be a bi-vacuum test of resistance at yesterday's low or yesterday's close. And if so, it could end and we could reverse back down. Because of that, some bears will sell below the low of that bear bar. Betting that at a minimum, we'll test back to the open of the day. At this point, the open of the day is in the middle third of the day. And we have a lot of trading range price action. A bear leg and now a bull leg. Traders expect the market to get back to the open of the day. It's a reasonable short. Especially if they can use a wide stock. higher probability. Wait until you get three or four consecutive bear bars and then sell closes or sell above the high of the prior bar. Betting that the first reversal up will form a lower high and we'll get a second leg down. We have a spike pullback channel. A very tight channel, but still a channel. The market usually tries to test down to the beginning of the channel down here. And at that point, bears take partial profits. So here, we broke below the bottom of the wedge and there's some hesitation. Bears took partial profits and aggressive bulls scalped, betting for at least a small bounce. The market's still always in short. The first reversal up probably is minor. So traders will look to sell from a lower high. Stop above the top of the bear reversal. Here we have a low 2 short. Low 1, low 2. Micro double top. Up, down, up. And a lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend. Bear breakout. Lower high. Two legs up. One pull back 2. And a second entry short. A reasonable short. Strong bear breakout below this low. And a follow through. Traders will start selling closes or they'll start selling bear flags. Every time they see a bull reversal, they assume it will be minor and the bear trend will resume. They'll sell a reversal down. A low 1 or low 1, low 2. And here we have another down, up, down. So it's a small low 2 bear flag. We have three pushes down. One pull back. Two pull back. Three. It's a parabolic wedge. Parabolic wedge bottoms are less common than parabolic wedge tops. And they're also often less clear. We have a bull bar. But why do we have that tail on top? We have a bull bar here. Why did this bar fail to get above that high? Something's wrong with the bulls. While it's possible this is the low of the day, it's not a very strong looking parabolic wedge buy setup. If you want higher probability, wait to see if we get several consecutive bull bars and then buy higher. Not extremely oversold. The bars are not especially big. And not a parabolic curve down. The third push down did not break below the line connecting the lows of the first two legs down. Maybe a little bit, but not much. This is not extremely climactic. And therefore it's not yet extremely oversold. And again, a problem. The bulls could not get above this bar. And here they have a buy signal bar, but a big tail on top. This is not a strong reversal up. Not a high probability buy. The channel is very tight. Probably the reversal is minor, which means sideways rather than up. That high two never triggered. High one, high two. A high one buy signal bar is only a small bull doji. Not strong enough buying to reverse this big bear bar. The bulls are not nearly as strong as the bears. While it's a possible low of the day and an okay swing buy, it's higher probability to wait to see if we get a strong reversal up and then buy higher. The probability for the bulls buying here is not high enough for a scalp. It's okay for a swing, but it's a low probability bet. I usually wait to see if we start to reverse up and then buy after the bulls have clearly taken control. And you can see the bull reversal did not get very far. We have a double top bear flag. This high and that high. This is a breakout test of that low. Not a very good looking buy. The bulls who bought above this bar or above this bar are exiting on the way down. Instead of getting a series of bull bars, they immediately got bear bars. Chances are we're going lower. We have four strong bear bars. Probably we'll get at least a small second leg down. This could be the small second leg down, but I think this is enough strong selling so that we'll get some kind of a measured move down. We're near a measured move, but not quite there. And the reversal up is not strong. A micro double bottom, but a bear bar. The market's probably going to fall at least to this measured move target. And this, therefore, this reversal attempt is probably minor. It probably will become a bear flag. Aggressive bulls will look at it and see another wedge bottom. We had a wedge one, two, three, and they'll say, oh, maybe it's a wedge here. One, two, three. Maybe this is the second leg down after this bear breakout. Probably not. This is a surprisingly big breakout. We're probably going to get a bigger second leg down. Again, a low probability buy. A bad looking buy signal bar. Four strong bear bars. Probably a minor reversal. And we'll go at least a little bit lower. Bear trends are always forming wedge bottoms. Bull trends are always forming wedge tops. When the channel down is very tight, the reversals are probably minor. And these wedges will probably become bear flags and the market will probably continue down. Here, the buy signal bar has a bear body and a very tight bear channel. This is a low probability buy. Probably the best the bulls get is a trading range. But more likely they'll get at least a little bit more down. The bulls will lose money. Bulls trying to get a high two. Sell off high one. Sell off high two. They only have a doji. They have another attempt at it here. And a bear bar. Big bear breakout. So probably more of a second leg down. And a bear bar. Big bear breakout. So probably more of a second leg down. Again, higher probability to wait either for a better bottom or a strong reversal up and then buy. Right now, all reversals up will probably fail, become bear flags and lead to at least a little bit more down. First leg down, pull back, second leg down. We reached the measured move target. We fell a little bit below it. And now you can argue another wedge bottom. One, two, or two, and three. Or one, two, three. Different computers will calculate the legs differently. You can also say one, two, or three. Again, different computers will use different bars. But the principle is the same. You can call it a nested wedge. We have a smaller wedge here inside of a bigger wedge here. That's a higher probability reversal. And a second parabolic wedge bottom. A very tight channel wedge. And it fell below the measured move target. We have a series of cell climaxes. Here. Here. Here. A four bar cell climax here. Three bar cell climax here. The market probably is going to get exhausted. And the market then will probably have to go sideways for 10, 20, or 30 bars. 10 bars, two legs, TBTL. Sideways, two up is likely. Here we go. Leg one, pull back, leg two. The market has a complex bottom attempt here. By complex, I mean a high two or high three. Here we have a high three, a wedge bottom. And we have a breakout and then another complex bottom. High one, high two, or small wedge. First bottom failed. And now we're getting another complex bottom attempt. Strong enough bare breakout to expect at least a small second leg down. I used to refer to this kind of a setup as a high four. But so much of the time, it's really a high five or a high six. Basically, it's a complex consecutive bottom pattern where you got a complex bottom and then a second complex bottom. And it can be a high four, a high five, or a high six. The first bottom was a wedge. And the second bottom is also a wedge. So this is a high six. If you want, you can call it a variation of a high four. Or you can call it simply consecutive bottoms, which is what I now call it. The market tried hard to bottom. It failed. It tried hard again to bottom. Higher probability that the second attempt will be successful. It doesn't matter if you call it a high two or a high three or a high two or a high three down here. The market's trying to bottom in a complex way. We got a bare breakout and then it's trying to bottom again in a complex way. After you have consecutive complex bottoms like this, 60% chance you'll have at least a couple legs sideways to up, which we got. Traders will buy above the high of this micro double bottom. Or they'll wait for bull closes and then start buying bull closes. That is a higher probability bet. Either way, they're going to put a stop below the low of this strong bull bar. Here we have a good bull bar. And then we have a second consecutive bull bar. Traders will start buying closes on either this bar or this bar. They can buy closes all the way up as long as they put a stop below the bottom of the bull reversal. And then we'll buy the close bull trend after three or four closes bull closes like that. Traders will start buying closes either for a swing trade or for scalps. We're getting a reversal down. It's about a 10 bar bull micro channel, but it's a reversal up from a very tight pair channel. The first reversal up is probably minor, which means we'll probably get a test down and then get a major reversal attempt. Bear trend, strong bull breakout. An attempt by the bears to resume down, yet we're getting a higher low with a decent bull bar. A breakout test of the buy signal bar highs and about a 50% pullback of the initial rally. Two legs down, one pull back two. This is probably going to lead to at least a small second leg up. Higher low major trend reversal. Because the first leg up is probably minor, bulls will take profits on a resumption of the bear trend back down. However, a lot of bulls will buy the higher low, betting that it's a higher low major trend reversal. And it is. 40% chance that they'll get a swing up. 60% chance that the market will either go sideways or start to go down. The risk is not big. They buy above the high of this decent bull bar. Stop just below or stop below here. Looking for at least a small second leg up. Now we have a double bottom. This low, that low. This is a double bottom, higher low. We also have a wedge. Three pushes down. One, two, three. So a wedge and a double bottom. Probably always in long after this strong rally. Reasonable to buy the reversal up here. Or if you prefer to buy above a bull bar, many traders do. You buy here. That has a higher probability of success. Two legs up likely. One, pull back two. And we have a lot of trading range price action. This is a bull breakout above a trading range that lasted about 60 bars. Most trading range breakouts fail. And therefore, a lot of the bulls will exit, take profits on a reversal down. Especially below a bear bar. Two legs up. One, pull back two. And a bear bar. Fail breakout above the prior high. Fail breakout above the top of the trading range. Reasonable to take profits. Bears see a trading range as well. And a breakout. And it's failing. They'll sell for at least a scalp. Again, a parabolic wedge bottom. We tried to reverse up a second time. This bar went above that bar, which is good. And this bar is a good looking buy signal bar. That increases the chances that we're going to get a reversal up. Here we fell below the bottom of the wedge. The line connecting point one and point two. And we are reversing up. Not a particularly strong buy signal bar. But it's a reasonable buy. Yesterday's low is around here. This is a wedge bottom. Opening reversal. At support. Yesterday's low. A failed breakout below yesterday's low. Maybe a 40% chance it's going to be the low of the day. Aggressive bulls buy above the high of the buy signal bar. Betting on the wedge bottom. Stop is right here. The risk is small. The reward is many times greater than the risk. So it's a very good trade. Even if the probability is only 40%. Traders who prefer a higher probability trade. Wait until we see a couple strong bull bars. And then they'll buy closes. And they'll also buy below a bear bar. Betting that the market is now always in long. And a reversal down will fail. So they'll buy at the low of this bar. And they'll get filled here. And then we have a high one buy. We have a bull breakout of a wedge bear channel. Bulls will buy above a bull bar on the resumption up. These buys all have a higher probability of a profit. Than this initial buy. The stop is the same. Whether you bought here or here. You're taking a higher probability buy here. And the stop is further away. The risk is greater. And that's always the case. Whenever you take a higher probability trade. You pay for it with worse risk reward. Usually a stop further away. After several bull bars closing on their highs. It becomes a buy the close bull trend. And traders can buy at any time for any reason. Some traders will buy and exit. They'll keep buying and scalping. Other traders will just buy once. And hold all the way up. Some traders will buy once. And then take one or more of these buys. To add to their position. Scaling into a trade that is going their way. To add to their trading options. To add to their trading options. This video shows many day trading examples for swing traders. trading examples for swing traders.