 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of six videos on trading ranges. I'll begin by distinguishing a pullback from a trading range. A pullback is simply a small trading range and the trend is likely to resume. A trading range is a pullback that has grown to so many bars that it's not clear whether the trend will resume or reverse. Next, I'll talk about the two hallmarks of a trading range, confusion and disappointment. Whenever you look at a chart and you feel confused or disappointed about the follow through after a move, you have to assume that the market's in a trading range, even if it does not yet look like it's in a trading range. Why did institutions create markets? The goal of the markets is to maximize trading. They want to make it easy to trade at a reasonable price. This is a one minute chart to illustrate a point. The market's going down and down more, but look what's happening to the volume as it's going down. As it's probing for a fair price, fewer and fewer trades are taking place. That means fewer traders are willing to sell at this low price. All markets are constantly in search of the best price, a fair price. And that usually means a price where trading volume will be maximum and the maximum number of trades will take place. So not just big volume, but big trades, lots of trades. And the market usually has to go too far to find out how far, far enough is. And then it tends to oscillate around the fair price. New information is constantly coming into the market. And eventually the market decides that the price is wrong and that it's either too high or too low. And it then has to probe in search of another fair price. I want to talk a little bit more about this volume. The market's falling. It's getting cheaper. Yet fewer trades are taking place. If it's getting cheaper, bulls will want to buy more. The price is getting lower and bulls always want to buy when the market is getting cheap. How can volume be going down if there are more and more bulls wanting to buy? It's going down because there has to be bears willing to sell for a trade to take place. If the trading is getting less and less and less as price is going down, that means bears are no longer willing to sell at that price. The price is too low and the market has to go higher to find sellers. I want to be clear. I'm not recommending that you look at volume. I'm using volume here to illustrate a point. In fact, I think most traders should not look at volume. It's a distraction. However, it does illustrate a point. Trading was drying up. Big volume. Another big bear break up, but fewer trades taking place. The market had to go higher to find traders willing to sell. Remember the goal of every market. It's to find an area of agreement between buyers and sellers. Between bulls and bears. And that's the reason why most bars on charts are in trading ranges or channels which become trading ranges. Only about 5 to 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout. 90% of the bars on every chart are either in a channel which evolves into a trading range and is the beginning of a trading range or in a trading range. That's because the market perceives a trading range as a range where price is most fair. And since the purpose of markets is to find an area of agreement between bulls and bears, price tends to oscillate around a fair price. In this particular example, you can see most of the bars are within a trading range. As I said, on any chart, only about 5 to 10% of the bars are clearly in a breakout. Only 5 to 10% of the time does the market clearly believe the price is wrong and the market quickly finds a more fair price of trading range. Here is a strong bull trend. But even when the market is in a strong bull trend, there are periods of two-sided trading. As bulls see the market go higher and higher, their stop is still down here or down here. It's becoming further and further away. That means their risk is greater and at some point they have to reduce that risk. The easiest way to do it is to take profits. And that's what happens here. You start to get pullbacks when the bulls are concerned that their risk is too great and maybe there's not that much left to the upside. They reduce their position sizes. Obvious stop at the bottom of the bull breakout or below the bottom of the entire bull trend. And that profit taking creates pauses in the trend. Eventually the pullbacks get deeper and deeper and deeper as bulls become less willing to buy high. They'll only buy deeper pullbacks. Believing that the market is evolving into a trading range, the more it becomes a trading range, the more bulls only want to buy low. Every pullback is a trading range, but a small trading range. As long as traders believe the trend is probably going to resume, I use the term pullback. If the pullback grows to 10, 20, 30 bars, then the trend becomes further and further to the left. It has less influence on the market. And eventually the direction of the breakout becomes unclear. It becomes equally likely that the breakout will be to the upside as it is that it will be to the downside. At that point, I use the term trading range. Pullback when you think the trend will resume trading range when it's no longer clear. Any area of two-sided trading is a trading range, even if it's only a single bar. It's common to see pauses in trends that last only one bar. For example, here. The market went up strongly and then it hesitated. On a smaller timeframe chart, this is a trading range if you get to a smaller timeframe chart. For example, if this is a daily chart, on a five-minute chart, this is probably a trading range day. It's a pullback on this chart, but it's a trading range on a smaller timeframe chart. Remember, I think of every pullback as a small trading range, but a special type of trading range in which the trend is likely to continue. I only use the term trading range when I believe the bulls and bears have become balanced. For example, a little pullback after three bull bars, probably going higher. Three bear bars, but about a 50% pullback of this rally. The trend probably will continue. Here, more bars in the pullback. It's less certain that the trend will continue. Strong bull trend. A pullback. Still more likely to go up. But, we have a bear breakout below the bull flag, and the bulls are giving up here. And bear trends usually begin with bear breakouts. And we got a spike, and then pullback, double top bear flag, and a channel down. Bull trend over here. Bull breakout. Pause. The trend resumed. Does this look strong enough to make traders believe the market will reverse this bull breakout? No. I would call it a pullback in this breakout, because I believe the odds are the market's going higher. The same with right here. Probably going at least a little higher. Same thing in a bear trend. Maybe this is a bear trend. Maybe it's a bear lag in a trading range. I think this does not look strong enough to reverse that. So, the bears are hoping this is a bear flag. This is a small pullback. This is a small pullback. It grew into a larger pullback. Is it a trading range yet? I would not use the term at that point. I still think the odds are the bears are more likely to get a bear breakout. So, I would still call this a pullback. Double top bear flag. First high, second high. Same with here. pullback. Is it a trading range yet? I would not use the term at that point. I still think the odds are the bears are more likely to get a bear breakout so I would still call this a pullback. Double top bear flag. First high, second high. Same with here, probably going lower. Here it's probably going lower, probably going lower, becoming less likely. Maybe you can start calling it a small trading range. Very strong bull breakout and good follow through. We have some bear bars here. It's a 10 bar trading range. However, do you think it's more likely that the bull trend will resume or more likely that it will reverse into a bear trend? Most traders would look at this and say, it's still more likely to go higher and therefore I would use the term pullback rather than trading range. You can call it a trading range. It is a trading range. Every pullback is a trading range, but as long as I believe the trend is going to resume, I usually use the term pullback. Strong bear trend, pullback, probably going to resume down. Even though this pullback has about 15 or 20 bars, the bulls have not done enough to create a major reversal and therefore the odds still slightly favor the bear breakout. You could say the trading range lasted all the way to here, so more than 20 bars. Getting close to 50-50 chance, the bulls will get a reversal. However, I still believe the odds are more likely that the bears will get the bear breakout. Even when a pullback goes 20 or 30 bars, I still think the odds slightly favor the trend that preceded it. Here we have a pullback that grew to 20 or 30 bars. It's close to 50-50, probably a little bit higher for the bears, maybe 51 or 52 percent. The trend will resume down. Maybe 48-49 percent, it will reverse up. Now we have another pullback, still a bear trend. Pullback more than 20 bars. At this point, I will start using the term trading range. We have a potential final bear flag here. Breakout, pretty good rally here. A lot of bull bars here. This is probably neutral at this point. 50-50 chance, the bears will get another leg down. 50-50 chance, the bulls will get a major trend reversal. A major trend reversal. Here, a higher low major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout, couple legs down, good looking buy signal bar. Higher low major trend reversal. Remember, the more bars that get added to the trading range, the more distant the bear trend becomes, the less influence it has on the direction of the breakout. And at some point, after 20, 30, 40 bars, the probability for the bull breakout, the reversal becomes almost as high as the probability for a resumption of the bear trend. Bear breakout, four consecutive bear bars. Look at the bodies. One, two, three, four. They're getting smaller and here, it became a doji. Bear breakout here, followed by a strong bull reversal. The bears are losing control. And it's clearly neutral, not yet bullish until you see these two or three bull bars. Big up, big down, big confusion usually results in a trading range. And once a pullback grows to 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 bars, it's becoming increasingly balanced. And the prior bull and bear trend, in this particular case, there's a bull trend and a bear trend. At this point, they're so far to the left that they've lost influence. And the market is a 50-50 market, 50% chance bull breakout, 50% chance bear breakout. If one side clearly had higher probability, the market would not be doing this. For example, if everyone looked at this and thought the probability was the market would go higher, it would be going higher. If they thought the market was going to go lower, it would be going lower. The only way it can stay like this is because traders cannot determine whether it's more likely to break to the upside or to the downside. The two important hallmarks of a trading range are confusion and disappointment. And if you feel either, the market probably is in a trading range, even if it's not obvious at the moment. Trading ranges can be very difficult to trade. There's always confusion at the start of the legs. It's rarely certain that a reversal has begun. So, for example, is this going to go up far enough for a trade? What about this? What about this? What about this? Signal bars and setups are usually weak. The trends are weak. They reverse. The pullbacks from the trends are often deep. Bull trend, but big reversal to a higher low. It's a pullback, but it's very deep. Usually, when you have a trend with a very deep pullback, in this case, up and then down. Big up, big down, big confusion usually leads to a trading range. Here we have big down and big up usually leads to a trading range. Signal bars are often weak. You want to be buying after five consecutive bear bars, one of them closing on its high. Here you have a doji bar. It does not look like a strong buy signal. Here you get a bull bar, but following a very big bear bar with a follow-through bar, not a convincing buy. And you want to be selling this after three strong bull bars. Here you got a high two, high one, high two, but a bear bar. Do you buy this? Well, what about this? It fell below that low. Also, trading ranges tend to spend a lot of time in the middle. Here we're spending a lot of bars in the middle of this range. We got a breakout two new low, and then this whole thing becomes a bigger range. And then look at this. We're spending a lot of time in the middle third. Bad follow-through after strong trend bars and breakouts. Good bull bars, bad follow-through. Good bull bars, bad follow-through. Strong bear bar, bad follow-through. Good bull breakout bars, bad follow-through. That's very common. You're constantly disappointed and confused. Every time the market looks like it's about to break out, it reverses. Setups that look like they should be low probability, in fact, are closer to 50% probability. Things that look bad are not as bad. This looks like a low probability buy, yet it did that. This is not a particularly high probability buy, neither is this. But bulls buying above the high of those signal bars still were able to make scalps. On the other hand, setups that look like they should have high probability, 60% probability, also have closer to 50% probability. Rather than a normal breakout or channel market where probability is usually often 40% or 60% low probability or high probability, in a trading range, probabilities tend to gravitate to around 50-50. Nothing is as bad as it looks. And nothing is as good as it looks. Looks like a bad buy, yet it went up. Does not look like a very good sell, yet it went down. Looks like a strong bull breakout, but look what followed. So it was not a high probability that the market was going to continue higher. Disappointment. Just when you think the market looks like it's about to break out, you get a reversal. Strong bear breakout, it reverses up. Even stronger bull breakout to a new high, it reverses down. Bad follow through, constant disappointment. If you see that, you know that you're in a trading range. Second leg traps. First leg up, pull back, second leg. And instead of this leading to a breakout, it led to a reversal. The market often looks strongest right before it reverses. Here's a small second leg trap. One, pull back, two. And instead of continuing up, it reversed down. Here, small second leg trap. Leg one, pull back, two. Instead of continuing down, it reversed up. And then a large second leg trap. One, pull back, two. Gaps and negative gaps, they usually close. The bulls have a little negative gap here. Should go up. And eventually closed. It soon closed. Bulls trying to get a gap here. And it closed. Bulls trying to get a gap here. Breakout test. Strong bull breakout. Testing this high. It closed. Bears have a bear breakout here. The gap closed. Bulls get a breakout here. Gap between this high and all of these lows. And eventually it closed. So disappointment. Gaps closing all the time. Bad follow through after strong breakouts up and down. In the trading range, my 80% rule. 80% of breakout attempts fail. No matter how strong they look. Very strong reversal up. And good follow through. Odds are buyers below. But at some point you have to conclude there are not enough buyers below to get a second leg up after this strong bull breakout. Strong bear breakout. And what happens? The market reverses. And bulls trying to break to the upside again here and here. And here reverses. Bears trying to get a breakout here and again here. It reverses. Four consecutive bear bars. Reverses up. Like all markets, trading ranges resist change. Trends. They resist reversing. 80% of the reversal attempts in a trend fail and become flags. And the trend continues. In a trading range, 80% of the breakout attempts, the market trying to become a trading range. Those breakout attempts fail. And the trading range continues. Traders are constantly disappointed by follow through. Very strong pair of bull bars. And look at this. If you're a bull and you bought that close, what are you thinking? You're disappointed. If you're a bear thinking that this might be a measuring gap, and then you see the follow through bar. Disappointment. When you see that, when you see bad follow through after strong trend bars, you're disappointed. That is the second hallmark of a trading range. The first one is confusion. The first marathon. Fantastic. It's not true. And the terugHHS met across aitiate roof. Strong breakout. Bad follow-through 들어� alrededor. Strong breakout. Bad follow-through. Strong breakout. Be a alt sweetie. Strong breakout. Bad follow-through flourish answers. Strong breakout. Bad follow-through. Strong breakout. Bad follow-through. Strong breakout. Bad follow-through. Strong breakout. Bad follow-through. Strong breakout. Bad follow-through. Strong breakout. Bad follow-through. When you see what appears to be a bull trend, yet the bull bars have bad follow-through, the bull trend is probably a bull leg in what will end up as a trading range. Here we're trying to continue up, but look at the follow-through. Where are the consecutive big bull trend bars? We had some early on, but not here. Here we had bad follow-through after every strong breakout. Here we don't even have breakouts. This is probably a bull channel that will become a trading range. Strong breakouts up and down, but the gaps soon close. This closed below the low of that bar and below the low of these bars, but look what happened. It closed. Strong breakout far below the low of that bar. The close is far below that bar. Gaps with all of these lows. Yet, look what happened in the next few bars. Every one of the gaps closed. Strong breakouts creating gaps, but the gaps close. Pullbacks usually go below breakout points. For example, here we have a breakup, but look at the pullback. It fell below the breakout point. Here, a strong bear breakout. And what happened? The pullback came back above the breakout point. Bull breakout quickly came back below the breakout point. And even reverse down. And even reverse down. Another sign of a trading range. Possibly an early bear swing. But because of all the trading range price action, traders will assume that this bear breakout will pull back above the breakout point, which it did. We have a bull swing and an attempt at a bear reversal. But it turns out it was just a deep pullback from this rally. Pullbacks are deep. So the market makes a big move up. It gets a deep pullback down. The market makes a big move down. It gets a deep pullback up. Again, the bear is trying to turn the market down. But look at the size of this pullback. It retraced most of that bear breakout. Every trend is really simply a leg within the trading range and not a trend. Bull trend, yes. But really a bull leg in a trading range. Bear trend, yes. But really simply a bear leg in the trading range. Remember, any pause in a trend and you look at it and you believe the trend will continue, that pause is a pullback. It's a small trading range. Again, I use the word trading range if the pullback has grown to so many bars that it's unclear whether the trend will continue or reverse. Here we have a pause, a pair of inside bars, an II pattern. This bar is inside that bar and this bar is inside that bar. It's high is at or below that high. It's low is at or above that low. Bull trend, a pullback. It's some profit taking by the bulls. It's also an attempt by the bears to reverse the trend. When you look at this pullback, you say, wow, those bears are so strong. This reversal is going to succeed. Or do you look at that and say, wow, that's not much by the bears. Chances are the trend is going to resume. Obviously, the trend is likely to resume. And therefore, this small trading range is a pullback. It's a bull flag. You're confident that the trend will resume. The odds are very high that it will continue at least a little bit higher. On the other hand, if you see a pullback and you're not really certain whether the trend will resume or reverse, I use the term trading range instead of pullback. For example, at this point, do you think the bull trend will resume? Or do you think this might be a higher high major trend reversal and the start of a bear trend? You don't know. It's pretty much 50-50. At that point, I would start using the term trading range. And I look to the left to determine where the range began. Maybe it began here. Maybe it began here. Remember, every channel is usually the beginning of a trading range. Even though it's still part of the trend. Trends transition. You have a strong bull breakout and then a channel. The channel is usually a transition into a trading range. So, it's part of the bull trend, but it's also part of the trading range. Trading range on the 5-minute chart here. The bulls and bears are balanced. The bulls try to get head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Break out, but not all that far. And the bears see a double-top bear flag. And the bears won. If you look at the 60-minute chart, all of this is simply a pullback on the 60-minute chart. And a strong bear trend. So, on the 60-minute chart, this reversal attempt is probably going to fail. And the bear trend will probably resume down. On the 5-minute chart, that's not the case. It looks pretty balanced. Bulls and bears. At this point, a swing up is probably equally likely as a swing down if you're looking at the 5-minute chart. However, this bull swing, even though the market's always in long on the 5-minute chart, it's simply a pullback on the 60-minute chart. The bear trend on the 60-minute chart is therefore likely to resume. Here's a 5-minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. And you have a bull trend. And then a trading range, lasting maybe 30 or 40 bars. Initially, the odds favor the bulls. But every bar that gets added to the range makes the probability closer and closer to 50-50. The bears see a head and shoulders top. Left shoulder, head. Right shoulder. The bulls see a nested wedge bull flag. 1, 2, 3. Or 1, 2, or 3. If you look at a 60-minute chart of the same thing, this 2 hours of sideways to down trading is simply a pullback on the 60-minute chart. When you look at the 60-minute chart, this does not look like it's strong enough to reverse this. Four big bull bars. On the 60-minute chart, this 2 hours of sideways to down trading is a bull flag. On the 5-minute chart, it's not as clear. And the probability is almost as high that the bears will succeed as it is that the bulls will get their trend resumption. In general, it's better just to trade one chart. If you're a day trader, you're probably trading the 5-minute chart, and you're not worried about the 60-minute chart. You trade the pattern in front of you. 60-minute chart. Clearly, the odds are the market will resume up. But if you're day trading on the 5-minute chart, a lot of times, a bull flagged on the 60-minute chart, bears can make money selling on the 5-minute chart. Those swings are often big enough down so that the bears can make money on the 5-minute chart. Small trading range, the market probably resuming up. I would call it a pullback. Even this, probably resuming up, so I would call this small trading range a pullback as well. When that's the case, when you believe the market is going to continue up, it's usually better only to trade in the direction of the trend. In this case, buy. On the other hand, this pullback grew to 30 or 40 bars, and it's not as clear if the trend will resume or reverse. And this range is very tight. Traders probably are better off not trading. Here, we have a pullback. Is it a reversal? I don't know. We went to a new high. It's confusing. Big up, big down, probable trading range. Big down, big up, probable trading range. And you could say this whole thing is a trading range. Now, there's no point this trade could go out. Once it becomes unclear whether the trend is going to resume or reverse, traders stop using the term pullback and instead refer to the pattern as a trading range. In a trading range, there are always reasonable buy and sell setups. The bears see a lower high major trend reversal, the bulls see a double bottom bull flag. The bears see maybe a wedge, one, two, three, or a double top, and the bulls see a double bottom or a double bottom here. A bull trend needs higher lows and higher highs. And bulls look to put their stops below major higher lows. Is this a major higher low? Well, I like to see two things. I like to see a strong breakout and preferably to a new high. So this is not clearly a major lower high. This falling below that is not enough to make me conclude the bull trend has ended. However, this is a strong bull breakout to a new high. If the market falls below this, it's probably no longer a bull trend. This did not fall below that. So you can argue this is still part of a broad bull channel forming higher highs and higher lows. Here we have another very strong bull breakout to a new high. So this then becomes the major higher low. If the market falls below this, then traders will conclude the bull trend has ended and the market has either become a bear trend or a trading range. And it did fall below that low at this point. A major higher low. Another major higher low. Finally, the bears broke below major higher lows. That ends the bull trend. At this point, no more bull trend. It's either a trading range or a bear trend. We fell below this low. But this is a minor higher low. And therefore, falling below it does not change the opinion of the bulls. They still believe the bull trend is up and is just having a deeper pullback. Where is the major higher low for these bulls? Well, it's probably down here or down here. These bulls are still bullish as long as it stays above this low or that low. Obviously, if it breaks strongly to the downside and does not reach those lows, the bulls will conclude the bull trend has ended. But if it simply kind of drifts down but stays above the major higher lows, it's still a bull trend. Here, we have a bull trend, a second leg up. And we're starting to get small bars, a lot of small bars. And the pullback just seems to be endless. When that happens, the prior bull trend loses influence. The further the bull trend gets to the left, the less effect it has on the market. The breakout becomes equally likely in either direction. Again, the bulls see a double bottom bull flag. And the bears see head and shoulders top or a wedge top and then a lower high major trend reversal. Whenever you look at a chart and you see a good argument for the bulls and for the bears, you know you're in a trading range. And the bull trend is also going to be a bull trend. And the bull trend is going to be a bull trend. Equally likely that you'll get a bull breakout as it is that you'll get a bear breakout. Equally likely that you'll get a bull trend. What's the minimum for trading range? Usually three legs and 20 bars. We have a leg down. It's still a pullback in a bull trend. It's still above this major higher low. And we have a leg up. A resumption of the bull trend. A bull channel. Higher lows. Higher highs. And as soon as you see the third leg down and if it falls below a major higher low, this barely did, then you have to be thinking that we have the minimum ingredients for a trading range. Three legs. One, two, three. And we fell below the bottom of a major higher low. This is probably a more important higher low. I mean it clearly is a more important higher low. But this, I think, is increasing the likelihood that the market is in a trading range. I would conclude that it's in a trading range at this point. The bears need a lot of bars to create doubt in the minds of the bulls. And once they do have enough bars, three bear bars, four bars here, three here, and then about eight or ten consecutive bear bars here. Once the bears have created enough doubt in the minds of the bulls about the continuation of the bull trend, the market's in a trading range. And there's equal chance that the bull trend will resume up as there is that it will reverse down. There are equally good reasons to buy and sell. Remember, a trading range always has to have both buy and sell setups. They have to be equally good so that you're not sure if the bulls or bears will win. In other words, it's confusing. And confusion is one of the hallmarks of a trading range. Bad follow-through after each leg. A strong bull leg, bad follow-through. And strong bear leg, bad follow-through for the bears. As the range grows, new buy and sell setups form. Old ones don't work and they evolve into new ones. I began this video by distinguishing a pullback from a trading range. A pullback is a small trading range in which the trend probably will continue. Once the pullback adds enough bars so that it's unclear whether the trend will continue or reverse, I use the term trading range. If ever you look at any chart and you're confused about what's going on, or you're disappointed after a strong move up or down, you have to assume that the market is in a trading range. And if it is, you trade it like a trading range. You buy low, you sell high, you scout. I'm Al Brooks. This is the first of six videos on trading ranges. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course.