 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos about entering late in trends. You'll often hear people talking about a FOMO trade, FOMO, fear of missing out. In a bull trend, there's a bull FOMO trade. Traders are afraid to buy, but they're afraid not to be long, so they buy small. And if everybody buys, the market tends to go up in a small pullback bull trend. And there's often a bear FOMO trade as well. When the market's going down, everyone's afraid to miss out. So everyone tends to trade small, not waiting for pullbacks, and the result is a small pullback bear trend. We have a bull trend and a tight trading range, a bull trend and a tight trading range. What's going to happen next? Well, we pull back for a couple bars, a little bit of a buy climax, buy climax, buy climax. It's reasonable to take that buy with a stop either below the bottom of the most recent bull leg or down here. And then other traders will buy the close. We have a bull breakout, maybe good bull bar, buy the close, buy the close. You'll sometimes hear traders talk about noise, that the market's in a tight trading range making lots of reversals, and it's not tradable and it's just noise. Well, that's really not what's going on. When an experienced trader uses the term noise, he's not meaning something that is random. He's simply meaning that the movements are too small for him to bother to do anything. If he's long, he's not going to get out. If there's noise, if he's looking to buy or looking to sell, he's not going to take an entry in the presence of noise. He's waiting for something bigger. Noise is usually something that's simply too small to trade. And you can see what happened. In this case, we have trend resumption up. And in this case, we got trend reversal down. And in both situations, the market was telling us something about what is likely to follow. And therefore, it's not noise and it's not random. It is giving us information. I'll talk about that more in this video, what the difference is between this and this. And there are some important differences between the two. If you simply look at both tight trading ranges as noise and you don't give them any other thought, you're missing clues to what might be following. Noise cannot exist. It's not random. It simply means that the reversals are smaller than what you care to trade. However, there are computers out there who are very comfortable trading those small reversals, and they are, and they're doing it logically based upon math. And therefore, the events are not random. We have an opening reversal and then a bull trend. We got bull trend, trading range, trend resumption up. Very easy to not trade the bull trend here or here. If you find yourself missing a lot of bull trends like that, it's probably because you're afraid that the stop is too far away. You know that no matter where you buy in here, your stop is down here. And it might be greater than what you can afford to risk. For example, if you bought high up in this bull trend, you stop is 20 points away. And if you have a small account, you cannot risk 20 points. That's $1,000 in the E-mini. And the same thing here. If you bought anywhere here, your stop is all the way down here. Again, possibly as much as 20 points away. In that kind of a situation, if it is greater risk than what you're comfortable undertaking, then simply don't take the trade and don't worry about it. You'll sometimes hear traders on television talking about a buy the close bull trend like this as a FOMO trend, a fear of missing out. And what happens is the trend enters a fairly tight, bold channel with very small pullbacks. Everyone is fearful of a big reversal, but they're also more afraid of missing a big move. So they trade small, use the appropriate stop. And as the market goes higher, they buy more. And the result is the market just keeps going up and up and up. The traders who are waiting for a pullback sometimes have to wait a lot of bars before they get their pullback. One technique that I use in trading FOMO markets, small pullback markets like this, instead of waiting for the pullback, a lot of times I'll simply buy the close. Anytime I start to get three, four, five consecutive bull bars closing near their highs, I simply just buy the close, look where the stop has to be and trade small enough so that my risk is not greater than any other trade. I also sometimes will trade half that size to allow for the market to pull back deeply. And then I can buy more and lower my average entry price. And a lot of traders just keep buying. They buy at the market, they buy below bars, they buy bear closes, they buy above bars, they buy bull closes. And they keep buying until the market transitions out of its breakout phase into a channel phase or into a trading range. And then they adjust their style of trading. These traders know what to do if the market reverses down. They know how to manage their trades. The risk of the market falling sharply after reversing up this strongly is small. And if it does sell off, almost certainly a trading range is more likely than a bear trend. And they can buy more lower expecting the market to get back to the top of the range, where they can exit break even on their earliest entries up at the top of the range. And then with a profit on their later entries lower in the developing range. The same up here, buy the close. Strong breakout, a bull bar follow through. Even though it's small, chances are the market's going higher. Traders can buy one or more of these closes, confident that the probability is high that they'll make money. It does not matter where you bought. If you bought above this bar or any of these closes, it's a small pullback bull trend. The stop is below the most recent major higher low. And that is here. Traders who are waiting for a pullback, they miss a huge bull trend. And when the pullback comes, they don't see it as a pullback, a bull flag. Instead, they see it as a reversal. And then they use that as a reason not to buy. The market's in a trading range here. So bears are looking to sell high, at least for a scalp. And bulls are buying low, either for a scalp or for a swing. Even though after 20 bars, the probability of a reversal is almost as big as the probability for a bull trend resumption. It's always slightly more likely that the trend that came before will resume. Most traders would not sell here because this is very strong. And now we're starting to get eight or 10 more bars in a small bull trend. It looks like we have a double bottom bull flag. And it looks like we are resuming up. The bears who did sell this high, betting on a double top, now are trapped. This breakout bar and that follow through bar is more likely going to lead to a measured move up, maybe based upon the height of the range. And the bears see that and they are giving up. The weak bulls are trapped out. They don't want to buy high. They see this as a trading range, not as trend resumption. So the weak bulls are trapped out, hoping to buy a pullback. When they finally get their pullback, they're afraid to buy. Or if they do buy, they get out with a loss as the market tries to reverse down. In any case, the bears who sold this high are trapped into a bad trade. And the weak bulls are trapped out, constantly hoping for a perfect setup that cannot exist. Experts know that the bears are trapped in and that there are a lot of weak bulls trapped out. And therefore they buy. They buy with confidence, knowing that the first reversal down probably will be a bull flag and will probably continue higher. Buy the closed trades look easy when you print the chart out at the end of the day. But trading them real time can be difficult. But you can take them as long as you're comfortable managing an attempt at a reversal. Knowing that whatever reversal you get will probably be minor and the bull trend will resume. And the best the bears probably will get is the trading range. And if they get a trading range, even if you bought the worst price, the top of the bull breakout, you should be able to avoid a loss or possibly even make a profit. Here we have three consecutive bear bars. We have a two bar reversal. If you want, you can call it a parabolic wedge. First push here, maybe second push here, and then third push here to a buy climax. A failed breakout above the high of the day. And you have three consecutive bear bars. However, what's more likely? The start of a bear trend or a trading range and then trend resumption up. When the bull channel is this strong, especially when it's reversing off a strong sell-off, the odds are the best the bears get is a trading range. Here they got a trading range that lasted 30 or more bars, but the market still resumed up. The math is really good for the bulls. Obviously, it's less good the more bars that get added to the trading range, but especially early on, buying these closes, buying the reversal down, buying for any reason, the math is good. The trader's equation is very good. The probability of making money is high. The probability of the reward being greater than the actual risk is high. And because of that, many of the bulls scale in. They buy more if the market goes against them. Here we are rallying for 10 bars, 20 bars. What's going on? Are the bulls acting like the bears are trapped? Are the bulls buying closes, creating a big breakout, creating a lot of problem for the bears? If so, the bulls are buying aggressively and you have to assume the first reversal down will be limited to either a trading range or a bull flag. Think about it from a bear perspective. If you're short for any reason, double top or possibly the top of a trading range betting on a double top reversal. And then you start to see this. If you're a bear and you did not exit, what are you thinking? You're thinking, oh my God, I cannot take the pain. I got to get out. So the bears are buying and the bulls are buying as well. Up here, what's going on? Are the bulls acting as if the bears are trapped? Or are the bars small and sideways with lots of small reversals? Is the market more balanced? Are the bulls losing confidence? Are they beginning to take profits? That's what's happening here. Instead of a buy the clothes rally with very little pullback and no bear bars, very few and small. tails on the tops of bars. Here we're getting bear bars, bear bars, bear bars, and the bull bodies are very small. What are the bulls doing? They might still be buying the lower drop bull bar. They might be buying that bear close. They might be buying above this bar and buying more lower. However, they're no longer creating a strong buy the clothes bull trend. They're no longer holding onto their lungs. They're scalping. They're buying low and taking quick profits. And therefore, the bulls see the trend as transitioning into a trading range. Well, what do the bears do when they start to see the market go sideways like this? They start to sell above bars and they start to sell bull closes near the top, confident that the bull trend is not going to resume, at least for a few more bars, and that we're probably going to go sideways or down. And therefore, they can make money with limit orders scalping. A fairly prominent tail. It's still by the close, but now we have a fairly big bear bar, a micro double top, and this is pretty climactic. Four consecutive bull bars with very little overlap occurring late and a bull trend. I don't have the measured move drawn, but this breakout is probably a measuring gap, and we're probably around a measured move up. It's a third push down, one, two, three, and therefore, it's also a possible wedge. If you're buying up here, you have to change your goal. A continued rally like this is not likely. After 10, 15 bars, it's probably not going to go up for 20 or 30 bars. Probably soon we'll start to transition from a strong bull trend into a trading range or a weak bull trend. That tail on top of the bar, especially after this climactic move and this reversal down, are signs that the bulls are beginning to take profits. Their stop is too far away. They have to reduce their risk. The easiest way to do it is by reducing their position. They're selling. Can you buy that close? Can you buy below the low of this bull bar? I think you can only do it if you're willing to use a wide stop and scale in lower. Maybe you put a stop below this bar, the final biclimax, testing the breakout point here. We have this gap. Technically, the best stop is all the way down here. A lot of times when you get a biclimax, especially late in a bull trend, there's a magnet just below its low. The market often comes down to just below that low and then bounces. And then the biclimax becomes a bull leg in an eventual trading range like this biclimax. And then a sell off to below its low, testing near this low. And the market goes sideways for a lot of bars. Let's say you bought this close and you were disappointed by the big tail on the top of the bar and by the two bars that followed. You're thinking that, well, yes, it was by the close, but the downside risk is small. However, maybe it'll go sideways a few bars and resume up. A lot of the bulls who bought the close of that bar, they did not like the tail and they did not like this follow through. So what do you do if you're a buy the close bull who bought that close and now you're disappointed? Well, a lot of those bulls will place a limit order to get out break even. And a lot of bulls will not buy higher. And the result is you get this. The bulls, instead of buying higher, are now instead looking to get out around break even, around that close. And the absence of buying resulted in this vacuum down to that close. The bulls at this point, after these two doji bars, are thinking that maybe they bought the final high close of the day. What's more likely, a continued strong bull trend or sideways to down? Probably sideways to down. Buy the close bulls disappointed by the tail and disappointed by the follow through. And then you get this reversal down. A lot of the bulls will get out break even if they bought that close. And they'll wait five or ten or more bars to see what we get. Maybe we'll get a deep pullback and they can buy lower. Or maybe we'll simply go sideways and get a good looking buy setup. And then they'll buy again here after they've given the bears ten or more bars to take control. If they see the bears unable to take control, the bulls will buy again. Had you bought here and the market just sold off abruptly like this, you can buy more lower. Like two legs down. One pull back two. Buy above a bull bar here or here. And rely on your stop. Either below this last leg up or all the way down here. As I said, a lot of the bulls who bought this close did not like that tail. And then they certainly did not like two bars right afterwards coming back to that close. The buy the close bulls are trying to sell. They want the market to come back below that close and sell. And a lot of the bulls would exit break even after they see one or two of these bars. So they'll start to sell around break even. After this big bear bar, the bulls who did not get out are even more disappointed. And they're looking to sell any little bounce to get out with break even or a small profit. I also want to talk a little bit about a FOMO bear trade. Bear traders afraid to miss out. And therefore they just sell. And it results in a very strong bear trend. We went sideways and we got a bear breakout. And then a small pullback bear trend. Strong breakout. We closed below the low of the past 30 or 40 bars. Near the low of the bar. The bar is much bigger than the prior bars. And then the next bar has a bear body as well. The odds are we're going at least a little bit lower. Traders can sell for any reason. Like on the close of this bar or better, the close of that bar. And the stock goes above the top of this bear reversal. Some traders look at this and say, oh my gosh. I have to risk six or seven points to take that trade if I sell that close. And that's far more than I am comfortable risking. I want to sell a pullback. And they wait and wait and wait. When they finally get a pullback, they think, oh, it's a wedge bottom. Trying to reverse up again and a third time. And they don't sell. And then they're trapped out again by this. And they're hoping to sell another pullback. And this pullback is not big enough. And they end up missing the entire trade. All weak traders are afraid of risk. And the weak bulls are afraid of risk as well, especially in a bear trend. And because of that, they want small risk. And they end up buying reversals in a very strong bear trend. Thinking that if I buy above this bull bar, my stop is below the low. I'm not risking much. But if you do that one, two, three, four, five times, at the end of the day, you did not lose much money on any one of those five entries. However, when you put the five of them together, you ended up losing a lot of money in your effort to reduce risk. It would have been much more profitable to sell and use the appropriate stop even though it's far away. But much higher probability of making money. The weak bulls, by every small reversal, especially above a bull bar closing near its high, they're constantly seeing wedge bottoms. One reversal, two reversal, three reversals. And then a failed breakout below a wedge. And now a second leg down, trying to reverse again. And now another wedge. One, two, three. And then a failed breakout below that wedge. They're constantly seeing reasons why the market will reverse up, even though they know that the probability is high, that every one of these reversals is much more likely to become a bear flag, leading to a resumption of the bear trend, than it is to become a bull trend. These are minor reversals, not a major reversal into a bull trend. And as I said, the loss on every one of these is small, but if you take enough of them, you're going to end up losing a lot. And it's comparable to bleeding to death from a thousand paper cuts. You still end up dead. I think one of the best techniques to avoid missing a strong bear trend is to sell closes. Once you look at the market and you see it selling off strongly and you're saying, oh my gosh, I want to sell a pullback, sell at the market and use the appropriate stock. If you're desperate to get in, the market's probably going lower, probably going lower because everyone wants to sell. And everyone's afraid of missing out. And therefore everyone's trading. The stop is small and therefore they trade small. However, if enough traders do it, the result is a relentless small pullback bear trend. You sell the breakout, another breakout, sell that close, try and reverse up. Don't buy the reversal, sell the reversal. Sell at the high of this bull bar, sell that bull close. We have another breakout attempt here. You sell below the low of the prior bar. You sell above the high of the prior bar. Because of the potential wedge, I personally would not sell the high of that bull bar. However, we have a double top bear flag here. I do not have the moving average drawn in, but it's probably just below the moving average. And we have a decent bear bar. So I'd sell below the low of that bar. And then sell closes all the way down. Every one of these bear closes. You wait until it closes. You get your finger on the button. As soon as it closes near its low, you just hit sell the market. And a lot of traders are doing that. Look at the open of this bar. It's at the high of this bar. And look at the close of the bar below. As soon as that bar closed, a lot of traders hit sell the close. And the result was the high of this bar, the open of this bar is below that close. And the same here. It tells you that the bears are extremely bearish and extremely eager to sell. As soon as any one of these bars closes, a lot of traders are just selling at the market. You have other traders just selling at the market as the market's falling. They don't wait for the close. They just sell. Very strongly bearish, sell the close bear trend. If you take any of these sells, your stop is up here. After three or four bars down, you have a strong enough breakout. A lot of the bears will move their stop here. So these bears, their stop is here. And once you see three or four bars here, you can tighten your stop to above the high of this most recent bear breakout. And that's true for the bears who sold here or up here as well. Once you've had a new breakout, it's probably going to be a major lower high. You can move the stop down, trail it to just above the major lower high. I began by talking about very strong bull trends. Trends that when you look at them, you say, oh my gosh, I really want to buy a pullback. That is a fear of missing out trade, a FOMO trade. And experienced traders, when they start wanting to buy pullbacks, they buy at least a small position at the market because they're afraid the market may go a long way up before there's a pullback. They're afraid of missing out. So they buy small. The opposite is true in a very strong bear trend. If you're looking at the trend and you're saying, oh my gosh, I really want a pullback so I can sell with smaller risk. That means it's a fear of missing out trend, a sell the close bear trend. And it's much better to simply do what everyone else is doing and just sell at the market, trade small enough and use the appropriate stock, hoping that the market quickly goes your way so you can take a quick profit. Knowing that if you get a reversal, the odds are very high. It'll be minor. You can sell more higher and then avoid a loss when it gets back to your original entry point. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of five videos on entering late in trends.