 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the second of four videos on candles, setups, and signal bars. I'm going to begin by talking about reversal bars, bars that lead to potentially trades in the opposite direction to the current trend. And then I'll move on and talk about reversals that take place over the course of several bars, multi-bar reversals. Finally, I'll talk about inside and outside bars. When a trader is looking to buy with a stop, a good signal bar is a buy reversal bar. And the minimum needed is a bar that has a close above its midpoint. So for example, here we have a bull trend and then we have an attempt to reverse. It's not a very good attempt and it closed above its midpoint. And therefore traders will look to buy a resumption of the trend. They'll place a buy stop just above the high of that bar. And then they'll get filled right here. This is not a bull reversal bar because it has a bare body. So it's a bare bar, but it is a buy reversal bar. It's reversing an attempt to reverse the trend. So the bulls are reversing the market back up again. And you see that by the bar closing above its midpoint. Down here, here's another type of buy reversal bar. This one has a bull body and therefore it's also a bull reversal bar. It closes above the open. And in this particular case, it also closed above its midpoint, which makes it a higher probability bet that the market will continue up. The market was going up, pulled back for a couple of legs, one, pull back two. And now we have a small double bottom, one, two. And the bull trend is trying to resume after about a 50% pullback. So bull trend, 50% pullback. We have a double bottom here. We have a micro double bottom here. We have a pair of bull bars. This one closing above its midpoint. And that is a buy reversal bar, betting that the market will resume up. You place a buy stop to buy just above the high of that bar. And you would get filled on this bar. Here are some other examples of buy reversal bars that are not bull reversal bars. So we have a bear trend, a little bit climactic here, and then much more climactic here. And the market sold off. And then by the end of the bar, it completely reversed back to where it started. It closed above its midpoint. So it's a buy reversal bar, but it does not have a bull body. And here's another example. The market is trending up as two, maybe three small legs down, double bottom here, higher, low. We have a major higher low here that led to a breakout to a new high. And it has a bull body. This is a reasonably good buy. Bear channel, bull flag, especially since it's above this higher low and above this one as well. Whenever you have a buy signal and the signal bar has a bull body, it has a higher probability of leading to a profitable trade than a bar that does not have a bull body. Here we have a close above the midpoint, but no bull body. It did in fact lead to a very profitable trade. Here we have a bull body, but it's a very small bar. It's a doji. So not an ideal bar either, but still led to a profitable trade. What's the best type of buy signal bar? Well, a strong bull reversal bar. And here we have a bear trend, a very strong breakout above the bear channel, a very deep pullback to slightly higher low. You can call it a double bottom. You can call it a higher low major trend reversal. And you have a very strong bull reversal bar. It's a bull body. It's a big bull body. It closes well above its midpoint. It closes near its high. Those are all things that increase the probability of a profitable trade. The trader sees that bar. He sees the context, a double bottom, major trend reversal. He places a buy stop to go long and gets filled here. He places a buy stop to go long above the height of the buy signal bar. And he gets filled on the next bar as it goes above the height of the signal bar. Ideally, you want a lower tail that is about a third to a half of the height of the bar. And you want a small or non-existent upper tail, which is the case here. But it also did not overlap the bar before or two or three bars. In other words, it's not a tight trading range. And that is good. And in addition to a good buy signal bar and good context, you also want to see a good entry bar, which is the case here. That increases the chances of higher prices. And you want to see follow through after that. You want to see a series of bull bars that has the highest probability of leading to higher prices. Buy signal bar, bar entry bar. And then the next bar is the follow through bar. And it's also a good bull bar. Decent sized bull body closing on its high. In other words, the entry bar and the follow through bar, they're not bare bars. They're not doji bars. They do not have big tails on top. And that increases the probability that the market will go higher. The best sell signal bar. Well, it's a bear reversal bar. Here we have a bear trend. Now we have a bull trend, but we have a buy climax and a double top, slightly lower high, two legs up in a trading range. We have two legs up, one pull back two, two legs down, one pull back two, two legs up, one pull back two. And after two legs in a market that looks like it's in a trading range, traders start looking for reversals. And here we have a second leg trap. We have a first leg and then a pull back and then a very strong second leg, making traders believe the market is beginning a bull trend. But instead it did not get above the top of the bars to the left. And it's probably just a buy vacuum test of the top of the range. And you can see the follow through bar instead of another big bull bar closing well above the top of the range. It's a bear reversal bar. It opened near or above the close of the prior bar. And it closed well below the prior bar's close. In this case, just a little bit below. And in the tail, about a third to a half the size of the bar. In the body, reasonably good size. No tail or very small tail on the bottom. So that's the sell signal bar. And bears will place an order to sell just below its low. And they would get filled on this small bear bar. That's not a particularly strong entry bar for the bears. It's small. However, a lot of times after a buy climax, the reversal begins with two or three small bars before traders finally give up. The bulls finally give up. Again, not much overlap with the prior bars. It overlaps, obviously, the bar before, but not the bars before that. It's happening at an extreme, not in a tight trading range. Sell signal bar and good follow through bar closing on its low. So now we have three consecutive bear bars closing on or near their lows at the top of a trading range. To me, that means we're probably going lower. The market's probably always in short at that point. So what's the minimum that a trader needs to see for a sell reversal bar? Well, a close below the midpoint. Here we have a small bear bar. We have a bear trend, five bars down, six bars down. And we tried to reverse, not very strongly. So it became a bear flag. And traders look to sell. They like to sell below bear bars. So here is a bear bar. They'll sell below that. Here we have a small double top bear flag. They'll sell below that bear bar. Even though these are not particularly strong bear bars, they are bear reversal bars. They're reversal bars. They're reversing the attempt at a bull trend. And they are bear bars. So they're bear reversal bars. That's unlike this. We're still in a bear trend. Now we have a double top bear flag. So it's a double top and a bear trend. So it's a double top bear flag. But it has a bull body. However, it closed below the midpoint or around the midpoint. And therefore it's a reversal bar. The bull trend is failing and it might be reversing down. Traders see that as a potential sell signal. And they'll look to sell right below the low of the bar. And they get filled here. While it has a bull body, it's still a reversal bar. The bulls are failing. And it looks like the market will reverse back down. Here it's a sell reversal bar. But it's not a bear reversal bar. Here, bear bodies. They're sell signals. So they're sell reversal bars. And they're bear reversal bars as well. Remember, not all cell reversal bars, not all cell signal bars have bear bodies. Look at this bar. We've got three pushes up. One, two, three. We're at a lower high. You can call it a double top. In any case, it did not break above the top of the cell climax, the top of the bear trend. Three legs up. So it's a wedge top. It's a sell signal bar. Not especially strong because this channel from here to here is very tight. The pullbacks are very small. Usually when you get a sell signal after a very tight channel, the channel is tight all the way up. Not much selling pressure. A lot of bull bars, not many bear bars. When that's the case, it's usually better to wait for a second entry short, which would be below this bear bar. We tried to reverse up here. We've got a small double top. Traders will sell below that bar and get filled right here. This is a sell reversal bar, but not a bear reversal bar. So it's not as reliable. And again, very little selling pressure on the way up. Where are all the big bear bars? There's one, but there's one. But not much else. We have a couple of small bear dojis, but that is not enough to reverse all of these big bull bars. In general, the first reversal down will be minor. Leads to a pullback, both lag or trading range. And if a trader is looking to short, it's better to short below a double top. We tried to reverse back up here and immediately reverse back down. And we fell below a reasonably good bear bar. So that would be a short. It's a sell reversal bar, close below the midpoint. That's the minimum needed. Again, not enough reason to sell. Here's another example. We have a double top, slightly lower high, two legs up, one pullback, two. We might be failing. The bull trend might be failing. Not enough bars for a major reversal. So it's a minor reversal at this point. However, it did lead to a major reversal as sometimes is the case. This is not, I think, a good enough reason to sell. I personally would not sell below that. A minor reversal, more likely bull flag than bear trend. But sometimes you get a bear trend. And once you start to get two or three consecutive bear bars, the body's getting bigger, closing on their lows. These three bars totally reverse that. At this point, I think the market is always in short and we're probably going lower. I would not sell below the bull bar. I think if a person was suspicious, let's say there were things on the left that we do not see, that makes it more likely that we're going to reverse down. If a person did want to sell, I would wait and sell below a bear bar, below this bar. So now we have a two bar reversal up, pull back down. On a higher timeframe chart, it would be a reversal bar closing on its low. So if you're taking a stop entry sell, I would do it below this bear bar, get filled here, not below this bull bar. Or you wait for two or three bear bars and then you start to sell closes. That is a higher probability sell. Sell below a bear bar closing on its low. If you're looking for an early entry. Early entry, the risk is small, maybe here, maybe above here, but so is the probability. A later entry after you've seen the bulls give up. Entering here or above this reversal attempt or below that bear bar is a much higher probability short, much higher chance of making money. But the trade off is risk. If you sell this close or above this bar, your stop is up here. Your risk is greater. Whenever you get a setup that offers you higher probability of success, your risk reward profile is always going to be worse. It doesn't matter if you take this trade where you're going to lose more or take this trade, which in which case you're going to win more often. The trades equation comes out to be about the same for both. Here you lose more often, but you lose less and your reward is bigger. Here you lose less often, but when you do lose, you lose more and there's less profit remaining in the trade. Both are acceptable. Sometimes reversals take place over more than one bar. Every signal bar in a pullback or in a flag is a reversal bar. And when the reversal takes place over two or more bars, it's a two-bar reversal or a multi-bar reversal. So look at this. We sold off, we reversed up. Let's say this is the five minute chart. We sold off, we reversed up. We reversed over the course of two bars. It's a two bar reversal. And if you look at a ten minute chart, this is what it looks like. It's a reversal bar on a ten minute chart. It's not always the case because if the five minute bar does not end exactly at a multiple of ten, like ten minutes after the hour or twenty minutes after the hour, it will not look like this. However, you should think of it as a two bar reversal and as a reversal bar on some higher timeframe chart. It's a good buy above the high of that bar right there, assuming the context to the left, which we do not see, supports buying. Reversals can take place over the course of more than just two bars. And the bars do not have to be consecutive. You know, just think of it as a reversal. We're going up, we're going down. So the market reversed. We have a strong bull breakout and a strong bear reversal. Here's the bull breakout. No reversal here, but we did get the reversal here. On some higher timeframe chart, this six or seven bar pattern is a bear reversal bar. Look down here. A bear breakout and we reversed up a few bars later. Here's a four bar pattern and it's a reversal. So it's a multibar reversal. And on a higher timeframe chart, you can find some chart where it's a perfect reversal. It's not worth doing that. You just know that whenever you've got a reversal that takes place over many bars, if you look at a higher timeframe chart, you'll find a perfect bar. So let's say this is a five minute chart. Maybe you look at a 15, 20, 30 minute chart, 22 minute, 25 minute, 27 minute. Doesn't matter. There's some chart where this is a very good looking single reversal bar. Again, do not do that. All you do is look at the chart in front of you and try to understand what the market is doing. And then look to enter based upon what's in front of you. Otherwise you might have to look at 10 charts to find the perfect bar and you'll be missing the trade. You won't, you will not take the trade. You'll be so concerned about finding the perfect bar that you will not be devoting enough energy to placing the trade. Again, we're selling off strongly and we reversed up strongly. Not a good buy signal bar here, but a pretty strong reversal. This bull trend bar is reversal. And if you look at some higher timeframe, I'm sure you can find some timeframe where you have a sell off and a bull trend. It creates a perfect reversal. This, for example, is a five minute chart and you can look at a seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 minute chart. Here it turns out if you look at a 15 minute chart, you have a very strong gold reversal bar. And likewise, if you look at a strong reversal bar like this, you know that on some smaller timeframe chart, it's a two bar reversal or a multibar reversal. Whenever I see a 15 minute reversal bar like this, I know that if I look at a five minute chart, the reversal took place over at least three bars because a 15 minute chart is made of three five minute bars. And if I look at a one minute chart, the reversal took place over 15 bars. So every good reversal bar is a multibar reversal on a smaller timeframe chart. I treat every two bar reversal as the same as a single reversal bar and I trade them the same. Again, they form a single reversal bar on a higher timeframe chart. Here's a two bar reversal down and up, but it's spread over three bars. You can call it a three bar reversal. You can call it a two bar reversal spread over three bars. Doesn't matter. You know the market is reversing. Every two bar reversal is a reversal bar on a higher timeframe chart. And again, you treat them like any other signal bar. It does not matter if they take place over two, three, four, 10, 20 bars. All that matters is the market's trying to reverse. Two bar reversal spread over five bars. We sold off and then we rallied. You know, I would not call it a two bar reversal. I would simply say, oh, it's a reversal. Three bars up, a breakout, very strong breakout. On a higher timeframe chart, it would be a single bar. It turned out to be a climactic end of the trend, but it would be a single bar on a higher timeframe chart. Here we're rallying, but look what took place over here. We reversed. On a higher timeframe chart, this would be a single bar. On some higher timeframe chart, this would be a single bar. And this entire thing is a reversal. We went up strongly. We went down strongly. This reversed that rally. And it took place over whatever that is, eight bars, 10 bars. And the key point is the market reversed. It tried to go up strongly and it went down strongly. So this reversed that. Multi bar reversal spread over the course of many bars. I'm going to talk a little bit about inside bars and outside bars. Look at this bar compared to the bar before. Its low is at or above the low of the prior bar. Its high is at or below the high of the prior bar. So this bar is inside that bar. We rallied. We sold off. It looks like we're bouncing. Look at this bull bar. Its low is at or above the low of that bar. In fact, it's a little bit above it. And its high is clearly below the high of that bar. So it's an inside bar. And inside bars in a good context often are good signal bars. There's a type of two bar reversal where the second bar is small. And it does not reverse much of the first bar. However, it's the start of a multi bar reversal. So down and then reversed up. And the reversal up was bigger than the sell off down. Context is good. Whenever I'm looking to buy or sell, I always look to the left. I want to know what the context is. Does it make sense to buy? And here we have a strong bull breakout and a bear reversal. But we have a bull bar after the bear reversal. So that increases the chances that this bear reversal is going to fail. Also, it's a slightly higher low. It's a test of the bottom of the buy climax. We went a little bit below it. But we held above the bottom of the bull trend. So the context is good for the bulls. We have a bear break up that is failing. Instead of a big bear bar for the next bar, we have a bull bar closing on its high. This is a buy setup. It's a type of double bottom and slightly higher low, which makes it an even higher probability buy setup. Look at this bar. Its high is above this bar. Its low is below the bar before it. It doesn't matter if it's above. As long as it's at or above. It doesn't matter if this is below. As long as it's at the low or below. Then this is an outside bar. It's a reversal. In this particular case, we went down and we went up. Do you buy as it's going above the top of the bear bar? In general, I do not. If this was a good buy signal bar, and we went outside of it, and above its high, then I would buy as this bar goes above the high of this bar. But in general, I'm not looking to buy as the market goes outside up. The context has to be good, and the prior bar has to be a good reason to buy. This is not a good reason to buy. I prefer to buy above bull bars. If I'm buying and I just look at these two bars, where am I going to buy? Am I going to buy on a stop above the spare bar? No. I might buy on a stop above the bull bar, because in general, if I'm buying with stops, I want to buy both bull bars. Here we have an outside bar. Its low is below the low of the prior bar. Its high is above the high of the prior bar. It has a fairly big tail on top. We're getting a bull reversal here. We have a slightly lower low reversal, and then we broke strongly to the upside, and this is a pullback. We have a micro double bottom bull flag. Not a very good looking buy signal bar here. Also, a big tail on top closing at this high, instead of closing above it. And this bar did not close on its high. Not a particularly strong buy signal. However, would bulls buy on a stop above the high of that bar? They might. This reversal up is strong enough so that traders think it will go higher. However, because this bar is not a good signal bar. This bar closed at and not above that bar. This bar did not close on its high. The rally is probably not going to go very far. We have a double top and we have a pullback from the test. We have a micro double bottom. All good. The close is above the high of two bars, which is better than simply being above the high of one bar. But it did not close above the top of the bull leg, and it did not close above the double top. So it's not especially strong. Good follow through. A bull bar closing on its high. Well above the prior high. Well above the double top. But this point, the market is clearly always in long. Odds are we'll get at least a little bit more up. Bears are hoping that it's a second leg trap. Leg one pullback, leg two. But here we have two good bull bars. The second one even better. Good sized bull body closing on its high. Closing up the highs of the past 20 bars. More likely we're going to go higher. At a minimum, traders are looking for some kind of a measured move up. Maybe based upon the open of this bar to the close of that bar. Maybe based upon the low of this bar to the high of that bar. Right here. The low point has been showing the low points out of course, off that bar. The low point ofero traded price took toward thn, and then, maybe like some lagi saidnasol into avanzade. We're going to move up and put out take a little bit more coming out. Um... And, ultimately, the market worked up. And, ultimately, the market worked up. Tight trading range. It's a warning that the rally might not be strong. But, the odds are, we're going higher. but no clear top and the pullback here while it fell below this low this is a minor higher low it did not fall below this low a major higher low a higher low that led to a strong breakout this higher low did not lead to a strong breakout so it's minor and probably this rally is part of a trading range and not a resumption of the bull trend this is a strong bull breakout to a new high this is probably the start of the bull trend resuming up and traders do not want to see the market fall below the bottom of a major higher low because then their premise of a resumption of a bull trend is no longer valid the market then is probably either in a trading range or even a bear trend trading range you could say bull trend bull flag bull breakout and went to a new high and as soon as it got to the new high what happened a huge outside bar the high of the bar is above the high of the prior bar and the close of the bar of the low of the bar is below the low of the prior bar but more than that the bar closed below the low of the prior bar it closed below below this higher low it closed below the low of the past maybe 30 bars or so so this is a very strong bear bar and the market probably is always in short we went up and then we went down so this is a large reversal and this one bar is enough to make traders believe the market will probably go at least a little bit lower how much lower well i'm always thinking in terms of measured moves maybe a measured move based upon the height of the trading range maybe a measured move based upon this double top who's selling here the bulls are clearly giving up so the bulls who bought above there or who bought anywhere in here once it starts to fall they're giving up they're selling the bears know that and the bears are selling as well this happens quickly remember at one point this was a bull bar and traders are thinking it's going up and then immediately it reversed down you have to be thinking about this so that you can act quickly you could sell on a stop below the neckline of the double top double top this high that high this is the neckline and there's a bigger double top this high that high and this is the neckline this is the lowest bar between the double tops that is also a sell signal a lot of traders find it very hard to sell when they're thinking the market's going up up up up up and then it reverses so quickly if you're not able to sell as it's forming then wait you could always sell the close of the bar or you could wait a bar or two or a bear flag and here we have a pair of doji bars a weak attempt to reverse the bear breakout more likely a bear flag than a bull reversal so traders will sell on the stop below that below the prior bar they'll sell here now we have a double top in a bear trend so a double top bear flag a good looking sell signal bar they'll sell here here we have a triangle three versus up one one and then two and then a third bull bar three that's another sell signal in this video i talked about reversal bars i then talked about reversals that take place over two or more bars multi-bar reversals and finally i talked about inside and outside bars the other bulls i'm al brooks thank you for watching the brooks trading course this is the second of four videos on candles setups and signal bars you