 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of six videos on trading the open. Context means all the bars to the left and they affect how you trade because they predict what the bars to the right will look like. Finally, I want to talk about how yesterday ended because it affects how today we'll trade, especially during the first couple of hours. On the open, context is slightly less important than it is during other times during the day. For example, at this point during the day, tight trading range probably going to be a lot of tight trading range for the remainder of the day. On the open, things that appear to be low probability are much higher probability than what you think, and things that you think are high probability are lower probability than what you think. Whenever there's a reversal, even on the open, it always takes place at support or resistance. And that means on the open, the support or resistance is created by prior days, bars to the left. And therefore, it's usually good to pay attention to where that support and resistance is because you want to see how the market will respond near that support or resistance. Do you have to do that? No, I don't need to know what the left looks like. I just know that we're far below the average price and we're reversing up on the open. The market's trying to put in an early low of the day. We're right at the average price, but below it and the market's reversing down for a second time. It's trying to put in an early high of the day. I don't need to know what the bars to the left look like. I know that from simply looking at what I see right here. And therefore, I can trade it based upon what I see here. I think this series of slides is particularly important for traders. This is a daily chart. Here's a five minute chart. White bar is a bull bar. White bar is a bull bar. On this chart, a black bar is a bear bar. And on this chart, daily chart, I have the bear bars represented by big blue bars. This is the start of today. And this is today. This is a daily chart. And this is what the day looked like on the five minute chart. I think it's very helpful when you're trading the five minute chart to look at the daily chart and see what the market has done over the prior days. Closing near the open, closing near the open, closing near the open, closing near the open. It went down. Next day it went up. It went up. Next day it went down. It went down. Next day it went up. It went up. Next day it went down at least some. The market is reversing repeatedly. A day like this, the market sold off and it rallied. It reversed in one day. Here, it reversed in two days. Down one day, up the next day. When you see this tight trading range behavior where the market is reversing every day, forming doji days, or every two days forming two bar reversals, what do you think today's going to be like? When the market's in a tight trading range on the daily chart, most of the days are one day trading ranges, dojis, or two day trading ranges, up one day, down the next. What do you think today will be like? Well, it's probably going to be a trading range day. And that means that even if you get a strong move down, it's probably going to reverse up. If you get a strong move up, it's probably going to reverse down and the market will try to close somewhere around the open. And that means that if the market is far above the open, what do you think is going to happen? Well, it's probably going to reverse and get back down and test the open at some point later in the day. And therefore, if you see a strong rally far above the open, and you see a reversal, you'll be much more inclined to sell the reversal, expecting the market to come down and test the open. And at the open, you'll look for a bounce up, maybe trying to get back to the high. So we've got two legs down, one pull back two. Bulls will look to buy a reversal up from around the open. And when the market's far above the open, even if it's following a strong rally, traders will look to sell a reversal down to the open. We're trying to reverse up to the high. Still plenty of time left in the day. Traders will still bet that they will close near the open. And therefore, they'll be more willing to sell a reversal down even after a relatively strong rally. They look to the left and they see most of the day is closing near the open. Well, this is what the days do. When they rally strongly, they reverse down. When they sell off, they bounce up and the day ends up closing near the open. Look at this day. A very big bear day closing below its midpoint and closing below the low of all of these bars. But look at here. It's a tight trading range. And you know most breakouts below a tight trading range, most breakouts above a tight trading range will fail. Therefore, if you see a big bear bar here today, what do you think tomorrow is going to do? Well, every bar to the left has either been a one day reversal or a two day reversal. And therefore, if you see a big bear breakout, you're going to assume it's going to be part of a two day reversal. And that means tomorrow is going to be a bull day. And therefore, when you see this close tomorrow, you have to assume we're going to get an early low of the day. And the day will try to be a bull day reversing this day. Can you see the difference between this chart and the last chart where all the bars were dojis? What do you see here? This is a daily chart. This bar is here. On this day, you look to the left and say, oh, I see four bull bars closing above their midpoints and several of them are closing near their highs. Therefore, what do I think today will do? Well, I think it's probably going to do what it's been doing over the past several days. And that means that it's probably going to close near its high, which means toward the end of the day, it's going to be near the high of the day. And that means it's probably going to put in an early low of the day. And therefore, I'm going to be looking to buy an early sell off, betting that it will fail and the market will trend up and be a bull trend day like all the prior days. And then if it sells off late in the day, it's probably going to rally and close near the high. Remember, I talked in an earlier video that when you have a bull day like this and a tail on the bottom, the tail is usually caused by an opening reversal down, an early sell off that reverses up. When you have a bunch of bull days, most bars on the daily chart, even if they're bull days, have tails below. When you have bull bars with tails below, 90% of the time that tail comes from an early sell off. And therefore, when this day opens and you see an early sell off, guess what? You have to assume it's going to fail and reverse up. So you have to pay much more attention to buying opportunities when you see an early sell off like this, when the daily chart looks like this. This tail on the bottom of this bar means that the low of the day is below the open and the market reversed up from there. And therefore, if you see an early sell off, be prepared to buy a reversal up or a pullback from that reversal up. So bull trend, a two-legged pullback to a high two bull flag, another opportunity to buy. Micro double bottom, bull bar closing on its high, good bet that we're going higher. The bulls want an early test of the bears. They want to make sure that the bears are not strong. So the bulls are happy to have a strong sell off and then they try to reverse it up. And if they see that they are able to reverse it up, they're going to bet that the bears don't want to sell at this price. Here the bears tried again, they tried again, and each time the bulls overcame the bears. Eventually the bears give up and the bulls can get a swing up. So the bulls are happy to have an early sell off because they want to see if they can reverse it up. And if they can, then they become confident that we're putting in an early low of the day and that we might get a swing up that could last several hours. Bulls will even buy a strong bear close like this because they look at the prior days and they say, Oh, every day has a tail below. That means there was a sell off on the open and the sell off reversed. Therefore, if I see a strong sell off on the open, I'm going to buy it betting on a reversal instead of a bear trend. Stop entry bulls like to buy both bars with stops, especially a second entry buy. The market went above the stoji bar, but two big bear bars, maybe it'll get a small second leg down. However, a second entry buy with a bull body, bulls will take that buy. Look at this. This is today right here. This is the daily chart. And what do you see to the left? Well, over the past eight or 10 bars, no bull bodies. Well, is today going to have a bull body? Is today going to close above its open? It might, but it probably will not. Traders are going to assume that it'll sell off early in the day like most of the days did to the left. You know that if today is going to be a bear trend day, that tail on top probably came in the first hour or so of the day. There was a rally and it failed. And therefore, when today opens, you have to be looking for an early high of the day, a reversal down, especially the second entry. Below the bear bar here is the first entry, and then we have a second entry here, a micro double top, bear bar closing on its low. A reasonable sell, taking a chance that today will be a bear day like most of the prior days. Traders will look to sell an early reversal down. This tail on the top of this bear bar was caused by this rally. Here's the open of the bear bar. There's the high of the day. The high formed early, and this brown box represents this tail on the top of that bear bar. The bears want an early rally because they want to see if they can overwhelm the bulls and make them give up. And if they can, they'll bet that we'll have a swing down that could last two or three hours, maybe all day. And the bears will sell a reversal down, especially the second entry short, entering with a stop. And they'll also sell the breakout above the high of a bar, betting that the rally will not get very far. Here we have a bull bar, but a big tail on top. And the next bar is a big doji, a bad buy signal bar. Tight trading range, probably sellers above. Since most of the days have bear bodies, today's probably going to have a bear body. Therefore, not only are there sellers above betting that the tight trading range will continue, there are bears betting that this instead will be the high of the day, not just the high of a tight trading range. Any higher timeframe can be important. Here's a 60 minute chart, and here's a five minute chart. When you have a higher timeframe chart, like a 60 minute chart, you have resistance, but look how long it's been since it tested the resistance. Two bars, two hours. Here, three hours since the test of that resistance. And therefore, resistance on a 60 minute chart does not give a lot of signals on a five minute chart. This blue line is this blue line. This is a 20 bar exponential moving average on the 60 minute chart. And I wrote a formula to show it on the five minute chart. This high is that high. And this high is that high. These two peaks on the five minute chart represent this high and then a high that occurred later over here. The formula that I use is not perfect because it's based upon the five minute chart. You can see that this high on the five minute chart did not get above the 60 minute moving average, but on the 60 minute chart it did. But it's a pretty good approximation. This is today's open. We're below the 60 minute moving average. Look at all of the bear bars here. We're below the 60 minute moving average. The 60 minute moving average was resistance here, which is right here. It might be resistance again today on the five minute chart. And therefore, even with a very strong rally like this on the open, you have to be prepared for the market possibly reversing down from the 60 minute chart. Remember that on the open, no matter how strong a rally or sell off is, there's a 50% chance it's going to reverse. Here, it was simply a test of resistance at the 60 minute moving average. We have a double top at the 60 minute moving average, a double top at the 60 minute moving average. Reasonable to look for a reversal down. Second entry cell, here's the first below this bear bar, and then the second's below that bull bar, or below a bear bar here. The end of yesterday affects the beginning of today. Very strong bull trend, strong bull trend, strong bull trend. This line is the end of yesterday. This is the start of today. This is the end of yesterday. This is the start of today. Small gap up. This represents the open today. Small gap up. Whenever there's a strong bull trend yesterday, I call that a buy climax. It's a very tight bull channel. There's a 50% chance that the market will try to rally in the first two hours. In other words, follow through buying. There's a 75% chance that the market will have at least two hours of sideways to down trading. That starts by the end of the second hour. Here, it started on the open. And there's a 25% chance that there will be an early reversal. Here's yesterday, ended with climactic selling. This is the start of today. Small gap down. Yesterday, climactic selling. Right to the close. This is the start of today. Yesterday, strong selling. Climactic. Down, down. And this is today. Gap up. Whenever you have strong selling yesterday, climactic selling, there's a 50% chance that you'll get follow through selling on the open. When I say on the open, it doesn't have to be the first bar, but within the first two hours. There's a 75% chance that even with strong selling like this, the market is going to trade sideways to up for at least a couple hours, starting by the end of the second hour. This trading range began yesterday, at the end of yesterday, and it continued on today's open. Finally, there's a 25% chance of a reversal. Strong sell off yesterday, and then strong rally today. We have a strong buy climax yesterday, strong bull trend yesterday. Yet, on the open today, we have a reversal down, and it's a micro-noble top. We went down on the first bar, up and down on the second bar. Traders will sell below the low of the first bar, or below the low of the second bar, hoping that it's the start of a bear trend day. A trend from the open bear trend. If a trader sold below the low of that first bar, he might have put a stop to exit the trade above the high of that first bar. And if he did, he would have been stopped out. But then he could sell again on the close of the second bar, or below the first bar again. Some traders would not exit their short above the high of that bear bar, because think about it. Is that bear bar a good buy signal bar? Are a lot of bulls going to buy above the high of that bear bar? Probably not, because we have a very big gap up. Usually when you have a big gap up, the market does not go straight up. And usually it will not go straight up if the first bar is a big bear bar. So some of the bears who sold below that first bar will use a wider stop. If ever you sell, and you get stopped out, and then the market starts to go your way again, you can always sell again. Big gap up. Big bear bar closing on its low. Possible trend from the open bear trend. Traders will look for an early high of the day, possibly a reversal down. A good swing short. Big gap up here. Big gap up here. First bar, big bear bar, and then several bear bars. First bar, bull bar, and then another bull bar. Consecutive bull bars always end long. When you see consecutive bear bars on a big gap up or a big gap down, the day is probably not going to be a bull trend day. It will probably either be a trading range or a bear trend day. Likewise, when you see a pair of big bull bars on the open, whether it's a gap up or a gap down, the day is probably not going to be a bear trend day. It's probably going to be a trading range day or a bull trend day. Consecutive big bull bars. Traders would buy on the close of the follow through bar. They'll buy the close of the first bar. And they'll buy below that second bull bar, betting that it's a terrible sell setup and therefore probably buyers below. Big gap up, bear bars became a trend from the open bear trend. Big gap up, sideways to the moving average, and then the bulls came back. Big gap up, sideways to the lower price, and then the bulls came back. We have consecutive bull bars, and then we had two, three, four consecutive bear bars closing on their lows. Some bulls would buy that close, confident that the reversal down would lead to a trading range and not a bear trend. However, early on we had two dojis, especially one with a bear bar. Dojis, especially one with a bear bar, a lot of bulls don't want to buy that far above the average price. Here's the moving average, hard to see. They'd rather buy the pullback. It's okay to take that buy, but if you do, you have to decide what to do after you get a bear bar or consecutive bear bars. The bulls who bought, some would hold to use a wide stop and scale in lower, especially around the moving average. Look for reversal up around the moving average. Others would get out on the strong close of that bear bar or on the close of the follow-through bar, betting that we're going to go sideways to down to the moving average or that we might be forming a bear trend day. Once you get the second strong bear bar, you're going to be thinking that the day might be a bear trend day or a trading range day. At this point, when you had the two bull bars, you were thinking the day was either going to be a trading range day or a bull day. Once you get the two bear bars, you're going to be thinking that it may be a trading range day or a bear day. And it's usually better to get out of your lungs and reasonable to get short. When you have a big gap up, I'll talk about this later. You often get a sell-off to the moving average and it can be strong. It often forms a double bottom like this at or around the moving average, or it'll have three reversals up. One, two, three. Therefore, it's a wedge bull flag testing the moving average. So a double bottom testing the moving average or a wedge bull flag testing the moving average. Either one, traders will look to buy the reversal up, looking for a trend up from the moving average. We have a wedge bottom, a breakout, and now we have a double bottom with the bottom of the wedge. Again, around the moving average, bulls will buy that as well. Another reversal up. So another double bottom. Here we have a wedge bottom, a bull breakout, not particularly strong. Stronger bull breakout here, testing to a double bottom, slightly higher low, good for the bulls. Again, around the moving average. They'll buy betting that the market is possibly in a broad bull channel. Here, it broke into a strong bull trend at the end of the day. Another buy opportunity. You wait for three or four consecutive bull bars and take a chance that it's becoming a buy the close bull trend, which could go a long way. All right. What do you see? You see a rally. You see a sell off. Is this the start of a bull trend or is it a bull leg in a trading range? Is this the start of a bear trend or is it a bear leg in a trading range? This is the start of the day here. Here's the start of the day here. 90% of all days have a swing trade that begins within the first 90 minutes. When you do get what appears to be the start of a swing trade, about half the time it fails and you get an opposite swing trade. And therefore, whenever I see the market rallying, I'm wondering, is it a bull trend or is it a bull leg in what will become a trading range? Whenever I see it selling off on the open, I'm wondering, is it the start of a bear trend or is it a bear leg in what will become a trading range? If a trading range is likely, you have to assume the market will go two to three hours one way and then two to three hours the other way and then maybe reverse again in the end of the day. What do you see here? Really good looking bull bar. But look at the follow through. Three, four bear bars. Bad follow through. A pair of good bull bars here. Not particularly big, but closing near their highs. And then a very big bear bar. A pair of bull bars here breaking out above the high of the day. But look at the follow through. Another pair of bull bars, but look at the follow through. Whenever you see really good looking bull bars with bad follow through, the rally is more likely a bull leg in what will become a trading range. It's a bull trend right now, but this bull trend probably is going to be a bull leg in what will be a trading range. Trading range behavior on the way down. But it became a tight bear channel. Eventually the bulls gave up and we got a measure move down. Bull leg in a trading range. Bear leg in a trading range. Bull leg in a trading range might have also been a bull leg in a bull trend. Bear leg in a trading range might also be a bear leg in a bear trend. But through here it was more likely a bear leg in a trading range. Lots of doji's, lots of sideways bars, around a 50% pullback. Testing support, testing support, testing support. And then you got three or four consecutive bear bars closing in their lows. We're in a breakout. So probably a bear breakout below a bear channel, a bull flag. And we've got the measure move down. Three consecutive bear bars on the open. Decent sized bodies. Two particularly big bear bars closing on their lows. Very tight bear channel here. Not a wedge shape. This is probably either the start of a bear trend or of a trading range. The market's clearly always in short. And it's reasonable to be short, hoping that this is the high of the day and that we're getting a swing down. Traders will sell below the first bar. They'll sell the second close. They'll sell the third close. They'll sell reversals up. Taking a chance that today will be a big bear trend day. Three consecutive bear bars and then a pause. Four consecutive bear bars and then a pause. More consecutive trend bars than what we have here. Whenever you have a strong sell-off on the open lasting an hour or two, the market often goes sideways for several hours. And then at the end of the day, the bulls hope for a major trend reversal up and the bears want trend resumption down. There's usually a buy signal. For example, a lower low major trend reversal here, a double bottom here, and there's also always a double top. The bears have a sell signal, the double top, looking for trend resumption down. And the bulls always have some kind of a major trend reversal, looking for trend reversal up. When the trend before is a strong bear trend, even though the probability gets close to 50-50, the more bars that you get added, there's still a slightly higher probability of trend resumption down than trend reversal up. Strong bear trend, sideways to up for about 10 bars, breaking above the bear channel. Therefore, you have to be thinking the next leg down might be the final leg, and the bulls might get a major trend reversal. However, this sell-off is in a very tight channel, and therefore the reversal up is more likely to be minor, which means a trading range more likely than a bull trend. The bulls tried again to get a double bottom, slightly higher low major trend reversal, but again, very tight bear channel. Odds are any reversal up is minor, and the market will either stay sideways or the bear trend will resume. Context is important. I'm always paying attention to what the bars to the left look like. I also pay attention to the daily chart. If most of the days are bull days, today's probably going to be a bull day. If most of the days over the past week or two are bear days, today will probably be a bear day, and that means that it'll probably get an early sell-off. If most of the days are doji bars, and the market's in a tight trading range on the daily chart, chances are today will be a doji day as well, which means it'll go one way and then reverse and go the other way and try to close near the open. And therefore, in the middle of the day, if it's far from the open, I'm going to look for a reversal, betting that the market's going to get back to the open. I always pay attention to how yesterday ended. If yesterday was a strong trend day, 50% chance there'll be an attempt at a continuation of that trend in the first two hours today. 75% chance that today will be sideways or go in the opposite direction for a couple of hours, starting by the end of the second hour. Only 25% chance today would be an opposite trend. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of six videos on trading the open.