 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading tight bull channels. I want to begin by describing what I mean by a tight bull channel. When a channel is tight, it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart, and when the market's in a bull breakout, it's better to only look to buy. Sometimes when the market's in a bull trend, it can have a bear channel, and the bear channel can be very tight. It's usually a bull flag. However, if it grows to 10 or 20 bars and then has a big bear breakout, that's a bear breakout below the bull flag, and it can lead to a bear trend and a measure move down. There are two types of channels. They can be tight or broad. Sometimes you cannot tell the difference between the two. And when you cannot tell whether it's tight or broad, trade it like it's tight and only trade in the direction of the trend. When a channel looks like this, it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Only look to buy. The pullbacks only last a bar, a bar, a couple bars here. The pullbacks are small. Here, the pullbacks can be big, and some of the reversals can be strong enough to make you think that the market's always in short. In fact, it can be always in short, but it's still a bull channel if it's forming higher lows and higher highs. You can see the pullback here lasted eight or nine bars. Pullback here, very big bear bars, a couple legs down. Much stronger selling in a broad bull channel than in a tight bull channel. Again, when it's in a tight bull channel, traders should be buying for any reason. They should buy below bars, betting reversals will fail. They can buy above bars, betting on a resumption of the bull trend, here and here. And they can buy strong bear breakouts, betting that the reversals will fail. So they can buy the close of a big bear bar. When a channel is broad, you can buy for swings and for scalps, but sellers can make money scalping, selling above bars, selling above a high, scaling in higher, and then getting out break even on their first entry and a profit on their second entry. The bears are reasonably strong, very big bear bars, a series of bear bars during the pullback, and therefore enough selling pressure so traders can make money selling, sometimes even with stop orders, but certainly with limit orders. Bulls will buy reversals up, high or low, major trend reversal, strong breakout, bull flag, bull flag, every pullback. They're buying pullbacks. Here they're buying for any reason, including breakouts to new highs. They could buy above a prior high. Here, when you're in a broader channel, when the market goes to new high, bulls sell to take partial or full profits, and they prefer to buy pullbacks. And the bears will start selling at prior highs and on reversals down. For example, a stop below here, a micro double top, a wedge, one, two, three, failed breakout above this high. And they'll also place limit orders to sell at a prior high and sell more higher, especially on a reversal down. The reason why I draw a distinction between a tight channel and a broad channel is because I trade them differently. When a channel is tight, it's very difficult to make money selling, and most of the pullbacks do not fall far enough to allow a bear to make money, especially with stop orders. And therefore, since it's difficult for the bears to make money and the market's going up, it's better to only look to buy. Whenever you look at a chart, and you can see that it's relatively easy for the bears to make money in a bull trend, then assume the channel is broad, and you could probably trade in both directions. However, if you look at a chart, and you look at it and say, well, how can the bears possibly make money? The reversals are small, they only last a couple bars, even selling above bars, it's not pulling back enough to make money. If you look at a chart and come to that conclusion, then the channel is tight, and you should only look to buy. When I think a channel might be tight, I'm looking for characteristics that increase the probability that, in fact, it is tight, and I should only look to buy. Do the pullbacks only last one or two or three bars? Here, a one bar pullback, here a two bar pullback, here two legs down, but only one bar break out below the low of the prior higher low. Is the pullback small relative to an average scalp size? Meaning an average scalp size is one point, and are the pullbacks all less than two or three points? In other words, it's very difficult to make money scalping if you're shorting. Also, I look at the size of the pullbacks. Are they small relative to the height of an average bar? If this is an average bar, are the pullbacks less than two to three times the size of that bar? And if that's the case, again, very difficult to make money selling. When you see a sell setup that would allow traders to enter with a stop, and the bears have a decent sell signal bar, here it's a second entry short, first and second, yet the bears are still losing selling with a good sell signal bar and a second entry short. Then you should not be selling. You certainly should not be selling with stop entries. The channel is probably tight, it's probably a small pullback bull trend, and you should only be looking to buy. Most of the pullbacks only pull back a third to a half of the prior bull leg. Here, the pullback is only about a quarter of the height of the prior bull leg. The pullbacks are small. And you see a lot of gaps. Here's a bull trend resumption. So its low creates a gap with the breakout point before it, so we have a gap. This low barely tested the high of this buy signal bar. We have a breakout above here and barely overlapping. If a bear sells at a prior high and scales in higher, is it very difficult for him to make money, or is he getting trapped? When you see gaps, it's very difficult for bears to make money with limit orders. Selling at a prior high and scaling in higher, you need the money to come back to your original entry to make a profit. If you have gaps, then it's very difficult for the bears to make money selling at prior highs and scaling in. Here's another gap here. If a bear sold at this high and scaled in higher, he could not make a profit. The reversal down did not go down to his original entry price. Difficult for the bears to make money, and therefore you should not be selling. If you're selling, you're planning on making money. And if you look to the left, you're saying, oh, the bears are not making money. You don't want to join them. You should only be looking to buy. Whenever it's difficult for the bears to make money, the market's telling you, you should only be looking to buy. Again, the pullbacks are just too small for the bears to make money, and the bears will lose money, and therefore you should never sell. Unlike a broad bull channel, when the bears can make money fairly easily, and a tight bull channel, it's very difficult to make money. They might make money occasionally, but they'll lose more on the bad trades, and they'll end up losing money on the day. When a trend looks like this, despite all of these reversals, the pullbacks are too small to make money. You should only be looking to buy. All bull trends are constantly forming wedge tops. One, two, three. One, two, three. One, two, three. It doesn't matter. All bull trends are always going to be forming wedge tops. But when the channel is tight, do not sell. The bull trend ignores the wedge tops, the reversals end up as bull flags, and the market keeps on going higher. Only look to buy. Expect all reversals to fail, and for the bull trend to resume. Different ways to draw wedge tops. We have a small wedge here. We have a bigger wedge here. The weak bears take the reversal, betting that the wedge top is going to be profitable. They lose money. And the weak bulls who bought for any reason, let's say above this small bull flag, they'll exit and miss the remainder of the bull trend. More wedge tops. One, two, three. One, two, three. The reversals are minor. They become bull flags, and the trend resumes. The risk is too big. The risk is too big. The risk is too big. The risk is too big. The risk is too big. When a beginner is trading, all he thinks about is risk. He knows that if he buys for any reason, his stop is too far, his risk is too big. But if he sells, his stop is close, just above the high of the sell signal bar, and therefore his risk is small. And his reward is potentially huge. He sees a great risk reward, but he ignores the third variable of the trader's equation. Probability. Whenever you have a very small risk, you're probably going to lose money because you cannot have a great risk reward ratio and a very high probability. But beginners, all they see is risk, and they see the risk of buying is big, the risk of selling is small, and therefore they sell. Ignoring the reality that the probability is very tiny that they'll make money selling, and the probability is very high that they'll make money buying. The probability more than offsets the risk for the bulls, and the probability is so big against the bears that the small risk gets overwhelmed by the low probability of making money, the high probability of losing money. Beginners, because they want small risk, they're looking to sell every reversal. And what they usually see are two things, wedge tops and strong sell signal bars. They're attracted to them like a fly to a light, and they just get burned repeatedly. Each loss is small, but if you have a bunch of small losses at the end of the day, you have a shockingly huge loss on the day. The Trader's Equation, three variables, and risk is not any more important than probability. The three variables, risk, reward, and probability are all important, and you cannot focus only on risk. You have to always think about probability, and whenever the risk is really small, you're probably going to lose money. The probability of making money is small. Do not sell. Do not sell. When the channel is tight, the pullbacks are small. It's a small pullback bull trend. The market's going higher. It's a breakout on the next higher timeframe, a 15-minute chart. Only buy. And if the stop is too far, then don't trade. Not losing money is certainly better than losing money. If you choose to sell, in other words, take the low risk trade, you're going to lose money. And if the risk is too big for you to use the appropriate stop, don't trade. Just watch the day unfold and learn from it. Learn that all the reversal attempts will fail, and the day will keep going higher. Again, I made the point that when a channel is tight, it's a breakout on the next higher timeframe. And if the market's in a strong breakout, you only want to be trading in the direction of the trend. Here's a five-minute chart, and here's a 30-minute chart. Lots of reversals. Lots of bear bars. But the pullbacks are very small. And if you look at the next higher timeframe chart, here I have a 30-minute chart instead of a 15-minute chart. Look at the chart. Every bar is a bull bar all the way up until we get here. And if you look at this, are you saying, wow, what a great sell setup? Or are you saying, oh, every bar is a bull bar. Every close is above the prior bar's close. This is a strong bull trend. I only want to buy. And that's the conclusion you should draw when you look at a very tight bull channel. You know if the pullbacks are small, a higher timeframe chart looks like this. And if you see that, you cannot be thinking about selling. The series of bars within the green channel is this series of bars. You have to train yourself to imagine what this looks like on the next higher timeframe chart. Or you just simply convert it into a 15-minute chart or a 30-minute chart or a 60-minute chart. And you'll see a very strong bull trend despite the bear bars and the frequent reversals. The pullbacks are small. Again, only lasting a bar or two. And then the bull trend resumes. When that's the case, only buy. If you're not sure whether you should be only buying and you see a chart like this, simple. Look at the next higher timeframe, 15-minute, 30-minute, 60-minute chart. And if it's a micro channel or a very tight channel, on the next higher timeframe, on your timeframe, the five-minute chart, only buy. It doesn't matter that we have a lot of bear bars and reversals. The pullbacks are really small. And that makes it very difficult to make money selling. This can be confusing. We have a breakout here. And then once you start getting pullbacks, you're in a channel. And when you have a lot of pullbacks like this, frequent pullbacks and lots of bear bars, it can be confusing. You see the market going up. You see all these bear bars and all these reversals. And you think, oh, it's a bull leg in a trading range. And maybe I should start selling. But when you look at the size of the pullbacks, especially starting in here, there's too small to make money. The pullbacks mean that the trend is not as strong as during the breakout phase. However, that does not mean that you can necessarily make money trading against the trend. It's still a strong trend, but it's subtle. All the reversals and all the bear bars make it look weak. But the pullbacks are small. And they're only lasting a bar or two or three. And the market keeps working higher. And as I said, you can always look at the next higher timeframe or a 30 minute or 60 minute chart to get reassurance that the trend actually is much stronger than what it appears to be on this timeframe. And if you're taking trades, you always have to use the correct stop. And it's often much further below than what you want it to be. If you cannot use the appropriate stop, then it's okay not to trade. Wait for the market to allow you to use the kind of stop that you're comfortable using. I mentioned that you can have a bull trend that has a tight bear channel lasting a few bars. If it lasts 10 or 20 bars, the probability of a bear breakout below the bear channel increases. If there is a strong breakout and strong follow through, it can lead to a trend reversal. Here we have a fairly tight bull channel lasting about 40 or 50%. The market's going sideways here in a tight trading range. Remember a tight trading range is a tight channel that's horizontal. Here's a tight channel lasting about six bars and going down. So it's a small bear channel, a small bear trend that became a bull flag and the market resumed up. Because whenever the market's in a bull trend, the odds are reversals will fail and the bull trend will resume. Traders will look to buy a reversal up. You can call this a tight trading range or a triangle. Traders will buy a reversal up above a bull bar. And here we have a bear trend only lasting six bars. I would not call it a bear trend. I would call it a small tight bear channel. And it was a bull flag. It evolved into a triangle or a trading range. And traders will look to buy a reversal up, especially above a bull bar. They'll buy on a stop above this bull bar and get filled here. We have a couple of bull bars here. A second entry, first entry, second entry, bull bar. They'll buy here or they'll buy above this bar as well. What's different about this bear channel? It's a tight bear channel like this one, but there are a couple of differences. First of all, it lasted 10 or 15 bars. And then next it has seven bars here without a bull body. And it has four bars with bear bodies. When traders start to see signs of selling pressure, especially if there is also a buy climax, they begin to wonder if the bull trend has ended and the market is transitioning into a trading range or possibly even into a bear trend. Again, traders are much more willing to believe the bears are taking control if there's some kind of a buy climax. And there are different ways to draw a parabolic wedge top here. You can say one pull back two, pull back three, or one, two, three, or one, two, three. We have a series of buy climaxes here, pause here, pause here. Remember every bull trend bar is a breakout and a buy climax. Because of the parabolic wedge, this is a triangle late in a bull trend, possibly a final bull flag. Traders will be looking for a possible reversal. Once they start to see three or four bear bars and no bull bars, they start to wonder if this is the beginning of a bigger pullback or possibly even a bear trend. Here we have three consecutive bear bars closing on their lows and the bear bodies are getting bigger. This is a bear breakout and the bulls are giving up. The bulls tried to resume the trend. They have a breakout above the bull flag, the bear channel, and it's reversing down. You can call it a double top here or a double top here. In any case, it's a failure and the market's reversing down. At this point, the market's always in short. Three consecutive bear bars each getting bigger. A big bear bar closing below the low of the past 20 bars or so. And we had a failed bull breakout above a protracted bear channel. Traders will sell the close, they'll sell reversals up, they'll sell reversals down, bidding that this is a bear flag. If this had gone on 20 or 30 bars, the probability of a bear breakout becomes close to 50-50. When it only goes on 10 or 15 bars like this, there's maybe a 40% chance of a bear breakout, which we did get here. I talk more about these concepts in the videos on tight channels and micro channels, pullbacks and bar counting, and major trend reversals. Sometimes when you have either a bear channel, a tight bear channel, or a tight training range, which is a horizontal tight bear channel, you can get a major trend reversal. You can get a double top within it and it can lead to a major trend reversal. Sometimes you'll get a tight bull channel and a bear trend, and it's a bear flag. Here, we have a very strong bear trend, and now we're starting to reverse up, and we have maybe whatever that is, a 9-bar bull micro channel, a tight bull channel. And that's a sign of strong bulls. However, it's still the first reversal up in a strong bear trend, and therefore it's a minor reversal. It's enough strength so that the bulls will probably get a second leg up after a resumption of the bear trend, but it's not enough to be thinking about the start of a bull trend. It's strong enough buying so that if the bear trend resumes, the bulls might be able to get a major trend reversal. Here, they've got a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. Usually, even with this strong reversal up, it's a minor reversal, the best the bulls will get is the trading range. However, once it forms the trading range, the bulls will have some kind of a major trend reversal setup. In this case, a double bottom, high or low. This is not a very good high or low, major trend reversal because this bear channel is tight. The bulls usually need a double bottom, which they got here. This is a higher probability, major trend reversal. It's a higher low, and the higher low forms a double bottom. So a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal after a decent minor reversal up here. A double bottom, and the double bottom is a higher low. So it's a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. Is the market still always in short here? Yeah, even with this, the bulls have not done enough to make it always in long. And even with this, still always in short. And even with this, always in short. We're still in a trading range, in a bear trend. You have about a 50% chance that the double top, lower high will result in a break below the neckline and a measured move down. Here, it's closer to 50-50, but it's still always in short. Until the market starts to reverse up, it probably went always in long here or here. At this point, this breakout above the top of the trading range, the odds shifted in favor of the bulls. Chances are the market will go higher. Strong bull breakout and follow through. The market's always in long. However, it's also the end of the day, and there's not much time left for a swing up. It's strong enough so that the odds favor at least a small second leg up. Reversal up, lower low, major trend reversal. We have a double bottom, a failed breakout below, another reversal up, another bull bar. And then a strong breakout here to a higher low, major trend reversal. Probably going higher. Strong bull breakout, always in long. You can buy for any reason. You can buy the close of that bar, below this bare bar, or on the reversal up from the break below the buy climax. A decent looking buy signal bar. A test of this buy signal bar high. And a good looking bull bar. And now we have another breakout and then a pullback. And now we're starting to channel up little pullbacks along the way. But the channel is tight, the pullbacks are small. One bar pullback. This pullback didn't even go below the lower of the prior bar. One bar pullback again. It's starting to become a very tight bull channel. Sometimes you look at a channel and you're not sure. Is this broad or is this tight? We have a bull channel here. If you cannot decide, then assume it's tight and only trade in the direction of the trend. Remember, if it's broad, if it's a broad bull channel, you can buy and sell. But you can certainly can buy because it's a bull trend. If it's a tight bull channel, you can only buy. And therefore, whether it's a tight channel or broad channel, you cannot get muddy. You can only buy. And, when you buy etcetera or simply buy into in just a pocket, so you cannot think of a further tradeγ entry. And if all change, if it's tight, then use that, and you need to turn a tilrain bar down. And depending on how you're dealing with gold, you can only trade trading. Those trends are straight again. One stock and trade again. Part of these trends are fairly and broad churches will trade most. Remember, in the short term tax喜歡 is less than a broad bull channel. So if u could terminate or trade in the direction of the trend, you can buy with that, you can buy and sell. channel you can only buy and therefore whether it's a tight channel or a broad channel you cannot go wrong only buying. Here we got a strong bear reversal but look at the follow-through strong bear reversal look at the follow-through it's a higher low and a bull bar higher low and a bull bar around a 50% pullback it's probably not worth shorting because the pullbacks are really not quite deep enough for a scalp certainly with a stop entry it's difficult. Do you really want to be selling with a stop here you can argue second failed breakout above this high expanding triangle one two three but very strong rally probably a 50% pullback and resumption of the bull trend. It's better to be looking to buy the failed bear break up buying a stop above here or buy with a limit order around a 50% pullback from this rally and the same is true here you stand to make more money buying above this bull bar then you do selling that bear close. In fact when you see a bear close like this you know the bears need follow-through a lot of bulls will buy that close and put a stop down here and then if the bears get a second consecutive bar they'll exit and take a loss but they know the probability is the market is still always in long and going higher. Easiest thing buy a reversal up you see a bull bar after the bear breakout buy a reversal up and bet that the market will continue to form higher lows. Every time the market reverses expect the reversal to fail look for a bull bar and buy above the height of the bull bar. Remember if you're an always in bull and you get out for any reason let's say you get out on the close of this bear bar if you're going to be trading always in if you're going to stay in the market for most of the bars of the day and you just get out and the market's still always in long even with that bear bar you got to buy again above a bull bar and that's why buying above a bull bar whether or not you're trading always in long is a good idea in a bull trend. Every reversal when you see a bull bar buy above it and use the appropriate stop. Anytime a market starts having very small pullbacks you know the channel is tight. So one bar pullback, two bar pullback and the pullbacks are small they're not falling a lot of points. Therefore the channel is tight and you should only be trading in the direction of the trend. Some pullbacks like this are fairly deep. Because they're deep by definition they're not small and therefore the market's not a small pullback bull trend here. It's still a fairly tight bull channel and very difficult to make money selling. Here it's becoming a small pullback bull trend. Traders should not be selling. Some traders when they see this trading range they might sell at this high sell more higher look for a scalp. But if you're not sure if the channel is broad enough to take the shorts the limit order shorts selling at prior highs scaling and higher only look to buy. In general whenever you see a bull channel if it's not clearly very broad only look to buy buy the pullbacks as they reverse up. Another thing is you can use your feelings as kind of a radar. Whenever you look at a chart and you're feeling agitated and you're desperate hoping for a deeper pullback that will allow you to buy then you know the market's going higher and you should buy at the market. Just buy at the market trade small and use the appropriate stop. The correct stops are usually fairly obvious. If you bought anywhere in here where's your stop? Clearly below the bottom of this strong bull reversal. So stop is here. Doesn't matter if you bought here. Doesn't matter if you bought here. That is your stop. And if you look at this and then you look at this and you know the bears are not doing much to reverse this. I think it's going higher but gosh that doesn't look strong enough to buy. Right? You think it's going higher. That means you're at least 60% certain. That means you have to buy. You buy above a bull bar. Buy above a bull bar. Use the appropriate stop. And go for a walk and come back in an hour. A lot of times there are other alternatives for stops. For example, if you buy above this bull bar, do you put a stop here? I would not. You can argue it's a high two bull flag after a bull breakout. But I would use the deeper stop because we might be in a tight trading range. We're having small sideways bars. We can get a second leg down. One pullback two. Suppose you buy above this bull bar. Can you put your stop below here? Well, after three bear bars, we still might get a second leg down. So it's still too tight. Buying above this bull bar. Can you put your stop below its low or here? I would not. But after these two bull bars, that might be enough so that the market should not get below this low. If you had to stop here, you could tighten up to here after you see this bull breakout or after you see this bull breakout. Reasonable stops. Once the market starts to go up, if you buy above here, and you get to this point, you could raise your stop. And then once you get a breakout here or here, you can raise your stop to below the most recent major higher low. Once you break out here or here, you can raise your stop. If the market is in a small pullback bull trend, it will not have a big enough pullback to hit your stop. If it does hit your stop, then it's no longer in a small pullback bull trend, and you don't want to be holding long trading it like a small pullback bull trend. Again, your feelings can help you trade. If you're feeling like the market is just forcing you to buy too high in a bull trend or sell too low in a bear trend, the market's telling you the trend is strong. If you look at it and you feel like, oh my gosh, it's climactic, we can get a big reversal. And any time, what you're doing is just talking yourself out of an obvious trade. You have to get long. You know where the stop is. If you buy here, the stop is at least here, maybe down here. You have to buy. Just buy small, use the stop. Then if you have to, just go take a walk for a half hour and come back. It's clearly strongly bullish. It's climactic. We have a series of buy climaxes here, here, here, here. And we could get a big reversal at any time. However, when a channel is tight like this, it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Is a breakout going to go from a strong bull trend into a bear trend? Rarely. And therefore, the best the bears will get is a minor reversal. In other words, a bull flag or maybe a trading range. And even if you get a deep pullback in a trading range, the market will probably come back here. And therefore, you can buy at any time, use the appropriate stop, knowing that if you manage your trade well, you should be able to avoid a loss, like 80% chance you can avoid a loss, and probably 70% chance if you can scale in, you'll make money. We have a bunch of alternatives for your stops, and you don't know which one to use, and you don't want to use the furthest one. Just pick any one in the middle. So if you buy this close, and you're trying to decide, do I use this stop, or do I use this stop, or this stop, just use any of them. Maybe one in the middle. You want to make sure that it's far enough away, so that you do not get stopped out of a good trade. For example, if you buy this close, and you're not sure if you put your stop here, the bottom of the buy climax, maybe it'll dip below that and resume up, then just use the next wider stop here or down here. Even if you get a bear reversal, again, when a channel is tight, the market usually has to transition into a trading range before it'll become a strong bear trend. And a trading range means if it goes down, the odds are high, it'll go back up again, and you can buy more lower and avoid a loss. A tight channel is a strong trend, and therefore, the best the bears probably can get over the next 10 or 20 bars is the trading range. They might get a deep pullback, but the pullback will probably be a bear leg in the trading range, and the market will probably trade back up to the top of the range, which will allow traders to get out without a loss. Skilled traders will add on lower, and they're usually able to make a profit, even if you do get a deep pullback or strong reversal attempt. 70% chance the first reversal down will test back up here and allow you to get out break even. 80 or 90% chance the first reversal down will bounce at least high enough up so that if you scale in lower, you'll be able to exit at the midpoint between your two entries and avoid a loss on the trade, get out break even on the entire position. Markets going sideways here. It's still always in long. Probably the best the bears will get is a minor reversal, like this one, a bull flag, minor reversal, bull flag, minor reversal, bull flag. Tight trading range, 10 bars or so. Now the market's more balanced. But it's still reasonable to rely on your stock, working a little bit higher. Is that a higher, high major trend reversal? Probably not. Not much selling pressure. We only fell a couple points, even though two legs, and it's still probably a minor reversal. Probably the best the bears will get is the trading range. We're getting late in the day, and therefore there's always a risk of profit taking. And when you have a small pullback bull trend and you're at the end of the day, a lot of the bulls will take profits and sometimes you get a surprisingly sharp sell-off at the end of the day. We're sideways for about 10 bars and now pretty much still sideways, sideways to up. It's okay to change your style of trading from bull breakout trading to channel trading and now to trading range trading. Trading range trading, it's okay, especially late in the day like this, to get out below a strong bear bar reversing down from the top of the range. Fail breakout above a double top. And that means it's the type of wedge, three pushes up, one, two, and three, even though the first two simply form a double top. Anytime you have a double top and a breakout that reverses, you have three pushes up. You have the two pushes of the double top and then the breakout for the third push. And if you get a decent sell signal bar like that, it's reasonable to get out below the low of that strong bear bar. It's also okay to hold long and rely on your stop. Maybe this point below here, late in the day, you don't want to use as wide a stop as you would if it were earlier in the day. The market tested down, formed a slightly higher low, and then resumed up again into the close. Let's say you bought at the top of this breakout. It's a buy the close reversal. You were confident that the market would probably go up for at least some kind of a measured move, maybe based upon the height of the breakout, the open of this bar to the close of that bar. 60% chance of going up here, a measured move up. And therefore you can buy that close and put a stop down here. That's your initial risk. Let's say you bought at the top of the channel. Is the probability as high that you're going to make money? No, this is a strong breakout. It's the strongest type of bull trend. This is still a pretty good bull trend and it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart, but it's not as strong as this. And the probability of making money buying that close is not as high as the probability of making money buying this close, but it's still very good. Here's the height of the breakout. Is it still a 60% chance that we're going to go up for a measured move based upon the height of the breakout? It might be. We're probably going higher. I don't know how much higher. We have a lot of small bars here. Your risk is less. The height of this breakout, if you buy that close, your stop is down here. Here, if you buy this close, your stop is below the most recent major higher low, just below this bear bar. So your risk is less. Whenever the risk is less, usually you get better risk reward. And better risk reward usually means lower probability of making money. I began by talking about my definition of a tight bull channel. And when the markets enter tight bull channel, you should only look to buy. It's very difficult to make money selling. And anytime you look at a chart where it's difficult to make money selling, you should only look to buy. A tight bull channel is a breakout on the next higher timeframe chart. For example, if you see a tight bull channel on the five minute chart, either the 15 minute or 60 minute charts will be in a breakout, a series of consecutive bull bars. And that tells you that you should only be looking to buy. Sometimes when you have a tight bull channel, there'll be a bull flag that is a tight bear channel. Usually it's only a few bars, maybe five bars long, but sometimes it can grow to 10 or 20 or more bars. That becomes an endless pullback. If you have that and then have a strong bear breakout and strong follow through, the market can be reversing into a bear trend. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading tight bull shells. that. And again, let's see how technical beeps is and is according to the Russians today. And I guess what you found on a debt bull 야ers of the avion system is an ouais flulling ten on wood? Because there's no one delay that's technical alleviation. But I don't understand why my first question is it is bear Марw случ systems that are dead and just confront them in the commercial Tell Q&A SW&A SW&A SW&A SW&JA.