 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third in the series of videos on Forex Basics. First, I want to talk about the value of a PIP. Then I want to talk about Forex Workspaces that are offered by different brokers. And finally, I want to talk a little bit about futures compared to Forex Trading. So how much is a PIP worth? Let's say you take a trade with 10,000 units. One PIP in that case is about $1. And if you do a search online, you'll find that there are a lot of free PIP calculators that allow you to plug in information about your trade and convert the information into dollars to find out how many dollars you made or lost. If you're an American trader, you only care about dollars. You don't care about PIPs. You'll often hear traders say that the standard size is 100,000 units. And when that's the case, one PIP is $10. Standard does not mean everybody trades 100,000 units. In fact, most traders probably do not trade 100,000 units. In the Forex market, there are so many different participants. Every imaginable size is traded. Okay. Let's talk about the Euro versus the dollar. And one PIP in the Euro versus dollar pair is quoted as .0001 US dollars. If you're trading 100,000 units, then one PIP is 100,000 times that or $10. Because the US dollar is the second name in the pair, the quote is in dollars, and your profit or loss is in dollars as well. So what happens with something else like the dollar Yen? The Yen is the second part of the pair. So the quotes are in Yen. If you're trading 100,000 units, one PIP in that case is 1,000 Yen. So 100,000 units times one PIP is 1,000 Yen. So 1,000 Yen is one PIP. And whatever profit or loss you make, it's in Yen. And if you have an American broker, at the end of the session, it's converted into dollars. If the dollar Yen cross rate is 104.32 at the end of the session, 1,000 Yen is $9.59. And one PIP in that particular case is $9.59. Let's say we have 100,000 units of the dollar Yen. And the dollar Yen is trading at 104.32. Then there are 104.32 Yen per dollar. Two is the PIP digit, the second digit. So there are 10,432 PIPs per dollar. And therefore, one PIP is one divided by 10,000. And it comes out to this many dollars per unit. If you're trading 100,000 units, one PIP is about $10. Standard trade size 100,000 units. And one PIP is 100,000 times that decimal. And it comes out to $9.59 or about $10. So in general, if you're trading 100,000 units, I always think of one PIP as being about $10. Every broker has software that allows you to trade. This is an example from TradeStation. They no longer offer Forex trading. It's a common type of example. With quote screen on the left with all the different popular Forex pairs. And then charts on the right. Here is from Interactive Brokers. This is another common way to present quotes. They show the bid and the ask for a variety of pairs. And you can put down any pairs that you want on the screen. And you can reorganize them, reorder them. Interactive Brokers also has a price ladder. And a lot of traders like to enter orders on the price ladder. And then also you can put a chart up. You can place trades on the chart. Now to place a trade, you need a market. You could go to a little kiosk down the street. That is a foreign exchange center. But the transaction costs would be so great. It's impossible to make money. The advantage of a Forex market is it allows you to buy or sell at any time. And whenever you want to place a trade, you need somebody else to take the opposite side. And it's the broker's job to create that market for you. Whenever you want to buy or whenever you want to sell, he's always willing to do the opposite. If you're buying, the broker or his bank will sell. If you want to sell, the broker or his bank will buy. Now there are two types of Forex quotes. During the trading day, there's the bid and the ask, which is very important to traders. But after the session closes, there's a last price. And it's used by the brokers to make adjustments after the session ends. Here's the ask. There's the bid. The ask is always the higher price. It's where the broker is willing to sell if you want to buy. So he's going to charge you more. And the bid is always the lower price. It's the price that the broker is willing to give you if you want to sell. You buy at the ask, the higher price. He sells at the ask, the higher price. You sell at the bid, the lower price. And that's the price he will buy from you. The difference between the two prices is the spread. Here's the bid, ask, spread. Here's the ask. You subtract the bid. And this is the spread. Here the spread is 1.4 pips. In general, you're going to lose at least a pip or so on every buy or sell. Some brokers have tighter spreads, half a pip. Some brokers have wider spreads, one and a half, two, even three pips. And the broker, that's where he makes his profit. He keeps that bid, ask, spread. And that is the reason why he is willing to do the transaction. He is always going to be willing to buy from you when you want to sell. He's always going to be willing to sell to you when you want to buy. Because he makes money on every transaction. Okay, here's an example. Here's the bid, 47. And here's the ask, 61. And the spread is 1.4 pips. He will buy from you at 4.47. And he will sell to you higher at 61. So he makes 1 pip or more on every trade. In this particular trade, if you sold to him, he made 1.4 pips. If you bought from him, he made 1.4 pips. Okay, example, 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar. Here's the bid, here's the ask. The bid at 47 is the price you pay if you want to sell. And the ask, the higher price, is the price you have to pay if you want to buy. The broker's profit is the bid ask spread. 1.4 pips or about $14. 100,000 units times 1.4 pips, $14. You can't ignore the spread. It's a major part of trading. In general, you're going to lose about a pip, sometimes more on every transaction. And that means if you're trading 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar, you're going to lose at least $10 on every trade. So you have to make more than $10 just to break even. For years, traders wanting to trade currencies did so in the futures market. But now, most trading takes place in the forex market. On the left, I have the euro versus the dollar five-minute chart. On the right, I have the euro futures contract. You can see they're virtually identical. Because they're identical, you can trade the futures market or you can trade the euro versus the dollar forex market. The advantage of the forex market, one of the big advantages, is that you can trade tiny positions. You can trade with very small accounts. Institutions prefer trading the forex market to the futures market because of the flexibility. Also, they don't like to be monitored. They want privacy. They don't want regulation. So they avoid exchanges. And the transaction costs are low. And as I said, if you look at the two charts, the charts are virtually identical. But a futures trader needs a bigger account because the margin is always going to be at least $2,000, $3,000, $4,000 to trade one contract. Volume is still very good. So in this particular day, this big bear breakout had a five-minute bar with 37,000 contracts, which is a huge volume. It's not like futures have such thin volume that you should not trade them. The volume is still huge. So the bid-ask spread is usually one tick. Just like if you're trading forex markets, the bid-ask spread is usually one pip or around one pip. If you're trading futures contracts, the bid-ask spread is usually one tick. $12.50 for a Euro futures contract. And the commission is about $5 around churn on top of the spread. So let's say you're trading at this particular price. You've got 1.24 is 12,400 ticks. At $12.50 a tick times 12,400 ticks. So the value of this Euro futures contract is $155,000. Every contract is worth $155,000. Now instead, let's look at the Euro versus the dollar. If you trade 100,000 units, it's $124,000, which is pretty close to the same as one futures contract. 100,000 units of the Euro versus the dollar is about the same size in terms of dollars as is a single Euro futures contract. Now, one futures contract, one Euro futures contract, the minimum cost per trade is the bid-ask spread, one tick, plus a commission, about $15. Now, the minimum cost, if you're trading 100,000 Euro versus the dollar, Forex units, the minimum cost is the bid-ask spread, which is about a pip or about $10. Sometimes it's more. So the cost is comparable. The spread, you cannot ignore it. On the very popular contracts like the Euro versus the dollar or contracts involving the yen, the spreads tend to be fairly tight. But on less traded pairs, for example, like the British pound versus New Zealand dollar, the spread can be 10 pips or more. Here, the spread, the bid-ask spread is 11 pips. If you're trading 100,000 units, the effective commission is still only about $7 per trade because of the price of the contract, 2.121. So even with the very big spread, that still comes out to a transaction cost of $7 each way. In this video, I talked about the value of a pip. I talked about the different types of Forex workspaces that the brokers offer to you. And then finally, I talked about whether traders should trade the Euro futures or the Euro versus the dollar Forex markets. And you can trade either, but there's a big move from the futures market to the Forex markets. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on Forex Basics. If you don't like the FBA vocês. Well now, the one is really expensive. You will buy Jasper be $1000 the聯合 centered RANKGles, whether Kosten for $1000 in yourwertis heeft. Its asp 되annya is his decryptack pool plus Então on the other side,