 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the second of seven videos on protective stops. I want to talk a little bit about what happens after a stop is hit. I also want to talk about the importance of using the correct stop. There are often several choices for a protective stop. One that is too small or too wide is usually a losing strategy. It's a trading range. It's a head and shoulders bottom. It's a high or low major trend reversal. Both are always part of a trading range. You can call it a triangle. You can call it a double top, a bull breakout above the double top. And therefore, a failed breakout above a double top is a wedge. So if you want to call it a wedge, three pushes up. One, two, three. You can. I would call it a triangle. Whenever the market's in a triangle, 50% chance you're going to get a successful breakout to the upside. 50% chance you'll get a successful breakout to the downside. So, you can call it a double top. Therefore, it's reasonable to sell here. We have a double top here and here. And now we have a small double top within the double top. The bears see it as a bear flag. A bear trend and then a trading range or a triangle or a wedge. A decent sell signal bar. This is an appropriate sell right below the low of that bar. And you get filled here. A logical stop is above this small double top, which is also above the top of the triangle. This is what you've got. A lot of traders would look at this and say, okay, that's a pretty strong bull breakout. And we have three pushes down. One, two, and then a bull bar. And then three, another push down. And we have a pretty good buy signal bar after a decent buy signal bar here. Around a 50% pullback of this breakout. Therefore, this is a wedge bull flag and the market's probably always in long. Instead of going down, we might be going up. Most bears would exit above the high of this bar. And many bulls would buy, betting that we're going to rally. The bears who did not exit here, the ones who relied on their stop, get out right here, just above this high, this double top. Bulls buy as well. They'll buy just above this double top. Knowing that the bears will have stops there, the bears will give up. They'll buy the close of this bar. We have a bull breakout bar here, a follow through bar. They'll buy above the high of this bar. They'll buy above the high of this pullback bar. A high two, high one, high two. Now we have a micro double bottom. Up, down, up. Second entry buy, another buy. Bulls will buy for any reason in here, looking for a measured move up based upon the height of the trading range. At this point, we're around a measured move up based upon the height of the trading range. Here's the breakout. The pullback dipped a little bit below it, so it's a negative gap. And here's the measured move projection. It's also a wedge. And it's also a big double top with this top of this bear trend. Slightly higher high double top, but it's a double top. Some bears will take that sell. It's not yet high probability. We have too many bull bars, and you don't want to be selling below a bull bar. This might be a little bit early. It's an okay sell, but low probability. A bear selling here might put a stop here, betting that if it goes above here, it's breaking above a wedge, and therefore a 50% chance of a swing up. Other bears might think, okay, we're getting consecutive biclimaxes. If this is not the top, the top will probably come pretty soon. So maybe you just use a very wide stop and stay short. The bears who did use the wide stop did not get stopped out, and they were able to hold short for the swing down. The bears who did sell here and got stopped out here could sell again either here or here or wait for this, betting that all of those entries have a reasonable chance of making money, especially selling here or here. Again, the bear who sold here, if he got stopped out, he's going to look to sell again. A failed breakout above a wedge, a second entry short below that bear bar, or on a strong reversal down here. It's not a big problem getting stopped out. If your trade ultimately proves still valid, you can always sell again. For every trade, there are several choices for a stop, and usually two or more of the stop choices are reasonable, and therefore you could take either one. Make sure to always choose a reasonable stop. Make sure to make a stop. We have a huge bull breakout of a tight trading range. This bar is maybe five times bigger than the average bar, and therefore you cannot use an average size money stop. You have to allow for a deep pullback. If you buy this close, for example, or if you buy above the high of this bar, your stop is all the way down here. If you buy this close, or above the high of this inside bar, you get filled right here, you have to use the correct stop. The most logical stop is below the bottom of the bull breakout. If the market falls below the low of this bull bar, then your premise of a bull trend reversal, or a bull breakout, is no longer valid. Therefore, it's a major low. We have a strong bull breakout, four consecutive bull bars closing at their highs, and a new high. At any point from here onward, this is a reasonable stop. You can trail your stop from here to here. So you move it from here to here. That's called trailing your stop or raising your stop. You want to keep your stop below the bottom of the most recent major high or low. Because as long as the market continues to have strong breakouts to new highs, it's in a bull trend. If it falls below one of those major higher lows, then the premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. The market is then either in a trading range or a bear trend. Another strong breakout to a new high. At this point, anywhere up in here, the stop now is below the bottom of the most recent major high or low. Bottom of this strong bull breakout. Another strong bull breakout. Three consecutive bull bars closing near their highs. A bull bar breaking above that high, and then a good follow-through bar. Chances are we'll get at least a small second leg up. Maybe here. Maybe pull back here. You can buy the close. You can buy above the high of this bar, above the high of that bar. You can even buy the low of this bar, betting the reversal down will fail. You can buy a bear close, especially a second bear close, thinking that the bears need three or more bear closes to reverse this bull breakout. And then you could buy here a double bottom. Not the same level, but it's still a double bottom. Another reasonable buy above a decent bull bar. You can buy for any reason. The stop for all of those trades, most appropriately, is here or here. Spike, pull back. Second push, pull back. Third push. This is a potential wedge top, but even here, the market's still always in long. Chances are a reversal will be minor and result in a trading range. It may come all the way down here to the bottom of the channel. Breakout, pull back channel, wedge channel, but it's still always in long. What do you do if you bought down here and now the market is doing this? We have a bear bar and a wedge top. Decent reversal here and here. Bad follow through after a bull bar here, again here and again here. We're probably transitioning into a trading range. The premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. It's reasonable to exit with a stop just below the low of this bar. You get filled right there. Alternatively, you could still rely on your stop at the bottom of the channel, hoping that whatever pullback we get becomes a bull flag and the bull trend resumes. One big problem for beginners is they tend to only focus on risk and they ignore probability. And the result is they use stops that are either too tight or too wide. Usually too tight. For example, let's say a beginner looks at this price action and he does not want to use a stop that's too tight because he knows he'll lose. He does not want to use a stop that's too wide because he knows he doesn't want to risk that much. And he ends up picking something in the middle. So it's a middle of the road type stock. I call it a dead skunk stop. And in general, it's the worst choice. If the trader did not exit on the reversal down from the wedge and he was still planning on using this stop down here, he would be concerned by the number of bear bars down, the size of this pullback. And he'd be afraid that maybe the market's converting into a bear trend. Beginners start to panic and worry and they say, okay, we have three bull bars here. This is a major higher low. I can put my stop just below this low. No, it's not a major higher low. It's a reversal up. But is it a very strong reversal up? Look at here and here and here. Those are strong reversals. Is this a strong reversal up? Is it a reversal to a new high? No, this is a minor higher low. And putting a stop below a minor higher low is a terrible thing to do. Because very often the market will have a first leg down, a pullback, and then a second leg down slightly below the first. The market very often falls below minor higher lows. And then the bull trend resumes. Placing a stop just below the low of that bar, that is a skunk stop. And it's a sure way to lose money. After the beginner failed to get out here, he cannot take the stress. After five bars, 10 bars, 15 bars, he can't take the pressure. And he just has to get out. And he'll use any excuse to get out. He'll convince himself that this is a major resumption of the trend up, and not simply a leg in the developing trading range. And he'll get out below the bottom. And he ends up selling at the bottom of a trading range. It's never good to sell low in a trading range. You want to sell high, like up here, when you think the channel might be converting into a trading range. Experienced traders, they'll say, okay, it was a spike in channel bull trend. It's transitioning to a trading range. In a trading range, I want to buy low, especially below the low of a prior low. The beginner is selling out of his longs here. The experienced trader is buying at this low, betting that it's a breakout in a trading range, and it will fail, and the market will reverse up, and not the start of a bear trend. Beginners do need to keep their risk small, and therefore they should only take trades where they can use an appropriate stop. For example, a stop beyond the signal bar. If a beginner pies above this bar betting on a double bottom, slightly higher low, it's reasonable to put a stop just below the low of that bar. An experienced trader can often use a wider stop. However, if the market requires him to use a wide stop, he'll trade small. A lot of times when he's using a wide stop, he'll trade small with the intention of scaling in if it makes sense. Therefore, an experienced trader has many more opportunities to make money. Scaling in increases your probability. It's a trade-off. Higher probability, greater risk. But an experienced trader can do that. For example, an experienced trader might buy here, betting that the market's either in a trading range and he's buying low, or it's a bull flag and will get a resumption up. But if he buys here, the appropriate stop is either here, we have a strong breakout to a new high, or all the way down here. Spike pullback channel, the bottom of the wedge channel. If he's buying here, a lot of traders will buy here and put the stop down here and buy more if the market falls lower. For example, he buys here. He may place a limit order to buy more if it goes to a new low, betting that the market's at the bottom of a trading range and not in the early stages of a bear trend. He uses his wide stop and he scales in. You can call this a trading range. We don't know what took place here. Let's say it was a bear trend. So you want to call it a slightly lower low, major trend reversal, or a double bottom, major trend reversal, or just a failed breakout below a trading range. That doesn't matter. We have a strong breakout closing above the high of the past 30 bars and a follow through bar, a follow through bull bar closing above its midpoint. Chances are the market's going at least a little higher. Bulls can buy for any reason. They can buy the close. They can buy below the bear bar. Betting the failed breakout will not reverse the trend and that there will be buyers below that bar for at least a small second leg up. You can buy above a high one bull flag, a pullback from the breakout. For whatever reason you buy, the stop is obvious. It's below the bottom of the bull breakout. Strong bull breakout. 60% probability the market's going to rally for a measured move up. 60% chance it's going to rally to here, which is the distance from the entry price to the stop. The stop is actually just below the bottom of the bull breakout. But in any case, 60% chance this low to your entry price, you'll get a measured move up to here before you get stopped out below. Deep reversal increases the chances that, instead of a bull trend, the market's now in a trading range. But in any case, chances are the market will come back to the top of the range before it hits this stop. The market's probably still always in long, despite four consecutive bear bars, because it's still a pullback from the strong bull breakout. Reasonable to stay long and rely on your stop. Some traders will exit on the big breakout or on the close of the follow-through bar, and then look to buy on a reversal up. And this is what we got in this particular case. A deep pullback after a strong bull breakout, and then a very strong bull trend. Is it forming a triangle or a lower high for a bear trend? Sure. However, I think we're still always in long. We're still above the bottom of a very strong breakout. The traders who did exit over here on the close of the follow-through bear bar are looking to buy again. They could buy again above a bull bar here, or above a bull bar here, or above this inside bar here. If this was a bear trend, this is a higher low, major trend reversal. If this was simply a trading range, this is a breakout and a pullback. Another reason to buy, looking for a reversal up. I talked about what happens after a stop is hit. In general, there's a 50% chance that the breakout will lead to a swing, and there's a 50% chance that the breakout will fail and reverse. I also talked about how it's important to use a logical stop. One that is not too small, nor too big. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of seven videos on protective stops. I'm Mr. Charleston and Hong conteú Mohammed Fanee. We already have covered that feeling in ourhyd feedback layer... ...the relationship side-by-providter in Sydney. It's היhteasy Embu resemblance of ourなく, so we'll have a few depression-y영ist,