 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on breakouts. An important point that all traders should understand is that for breakouts to be successful, they need follow through instead of a reversal in the next bar. Trends are always trying to reverse, but if they have good follow through, chances are they will continue in the next bar. At least a little bit further. The final point I want to make is that breakouts can begin as small bars or series of small bars. They do not have to begin with a big trend bar. After every breakout, traders like to see confirmation. Here we have a bull channel, bear flag. I think of every bull channel as a bear flag. Every bear channel is a bull flag. In other words, a bull channel, chances are it's going to get a bear breakout. Well, here's a bear breakout. If it's only a single bear bar, chances are it's not going to lead to a reversal. It'll probably lead to a trading range, maybe another leg up. So, the more consecutive bear bars, the bigger the bear bars, the more they close on their lows, the more likely this is going to lead to a swing down. Next bar, this is the follow through bar. The first bar is the breakout bar. And the next bar is the follow through bar. Sometimes the follow through bar can be the second or third or fourth bar. In any case, with a strong follow through bar like this, a bear bar closing on its low, close below the low of that bar. Consecutive bear bars closing on their lows, decent sized bodies. It increases the chances that this is a measuring gap and that it will lead to a measured move down. From this high breakout point, and it fell more than a measured move down. On the other hand, here's another attempt at a bear breakout. We have an attempt here. We have another attempt here. We have a bull trend. So, we have a spike in small channel. Then we have a bear breakout. But a couple of problems with it. Tail on the bottom of the bar. And look at the follow through bar. It's a reversal bar. This bar, tail on the bottom, not especially a big bear bar, and close at this low instead of far below that low. So, the bear breakout is not very strong. And the next bar is a big bull bar closing on its high. So, it's totally reversing the bear breakout. Now, remember I said that anytime I see a trend bar up or down, I think of it as a breakout. Now, you can call this a breakout or you can call it a failed bear reversal. Breakout of what? A bull flag. It's a high one bull flag. We trend it up. We pull back. And this is a high one buy signal. And we trend it above it. And some bulls will buy here. Other bulls will buy above a bull bar. So, a two bar reversal. Down, up, and then they'll buy here. Main point, bear breakout, terrible follow through. Unlikely to go down. Here, bear breakout, good follow through. Probably get at least some follow through selling. Yes, some bears are sold this close. And not a high probability sell, but probably good risk reward. Maybe they put their stop above the bear bar. Maybe above this. Hoping for a huge move down. So, big reward, not big risk. But whenever you have great risk reward, you have terrible probability. With this close at this low instead of below the low. And with no follow through bear bar, yet the probability of selling this close is low. Here the bank. And there are a big risk reward. Whenever you get these bear breakouts like this and like this. A low probability to sell here. But once you get a strong follow through bar, it confirms the breakout and it increases the probability that prices will continue down. Here, we have a bear breakout and a terrible follow through bar. and terrible follow-through bar. Instead we got a good reversal up. A lot of bulls when they see a bar like this knowing that the bears need a strong follow-through bar they bet against it. Most reversals fail. We have a bull trend. Most reversals fail. And most breakouts fail. Trying to break below a bull trend line. Some bulls will buy that close betting that the next bar will not be another bear bar. So the bulls buy that close betting that the bears will not get their follow-through bar. Some bulls bought this close. The bears got their follow-through bar and a lot of the bulls who bought that close exited here. And they're not going to buy again for at least several bars. That means no buyers immediately below and the market has to go lower to find buyers. Bear breakout. The bulls know the bears need one more bar. The bulls will buy that close. And if the bears get their second bar as they did here, the bulls will take their loss. They'll sell out with a loss. Bear breakout. The bulls will take their first break. Whenever there's any kind of a breakout, traders want to see confirmation. Bear breakout. Confirmation. Increases the probability we're going lower. Bear breakout. No confirmation. Here we've got a bull breakout. New high above this. New high above that. And look at the confirmation. Bad confirmation. No confirmation. It's an attempt at a reversal instead of a strong follow-through bar. Bull breakout. And then you get a bear bar. It's a failed bear breakout. Bear breakout. Followed by a bull bar is a failed bear breakout. Strong trends are always trying to reverse. Here we have 10 or 15 bars below the moving average. We have five consecutive bear bars here. And then these nine bars here, we only have one bull bar. Bulls trying to reverse up. Trying to reverse up again. And decent bull bar closing above the high of this bar. And closing above the high of maybe six or seven bars. But that's the breakout bar. The bulls need at least one more bull bar to convince traders that they have taken control. What do bears do? They sell that close. Also, anytime the market's in a bear trend below the moving average, and there's a bull bar closing near the moving average, bears sell the close. They sell that close. They sell the close of any strong bull bar at the moving average, betting that 80% of trend reversal attempts will fail. So chances are this bull breakout will fail. And the next bar, instead of being another bull bar, a follow-through bar, it'll be a reversal. Whenever you look at a reversal and you think, gosh, I think the bulls need one more bar. Well, bears will sell that close, betting that the bulls will not get their one more bar, and that the bear trend will resume down. Same thing here. Big bull bar near the moving average. Most reversal attempts will fail in a reasonably strong bear trend. Fairly tight bear channel holding below the moving average. I would rather sell the close of that bull bar than buy the close. I would bet against the bulls getting their follow-through bar. Same here, same here. And what about here? We're finally above the moving average, and we have a bull breakout above the high of the past 30 bars, maybe. And we have a bull follow-through bar. Well, bears would sell that one as well, arguing, yeah, bull breakout, but look at the rally. Where are the consecutive big bull bars? Here we have consecutive bull bars, but they're not especially big. So this entire rally is probably a bull leg in a trading range. Bear trend lasting 50 or 60 bars. Gap bars. Gap between the low of this bar and the moving average. Gap bars here. Usually gap bars mean the market will have at least one more leg down. They're a sign of the bulls becoming stronger. The bulls are strong enough to put bars completely above the moving average. But when you're in a bear trend, the first time the bulls do anything, bears sell it. So the first time you get a big bull bar, the bears sell. The first time you touch the moving average, they sell. They were willing to sell below an average price for all of these bars. And now they finally get a chance to sell at the average price. They're going to sell. First time the market creates gap bars, bears will sell, betting that the reversal attempt will fail. Other bears, instead of selling strong bull closes, they wait for reversals down. We have a bear trend, leg one, pullback leg two. Bear bar closing on its low. They'll sell below the low of that bar, stop up here. They'll sell below the low of this bar, stop up here. Bulls try to reverse up. Bears resume down. So they'll sell below the bull bar or below the bear bar. Some traders prefer stop entries selling below bars once the reversal attempt up fails. Same thing here. Bear is getting a breakout, but they probably need one more bar. We broke below the moving average. We broke below the low of the prior bar. We broke below this double bottom. But close at these lows instead of far below. Close off the low of the bar. Not all that far below the moving average. And we're still holding above the bottom of the bull trend. If you're a trader and you're looking at that, what's more likely? That we're going to continue down or that this bear breakout attempt will fail? Probably will fail. And because of that, as soon as the bulls see this close, they hit by the market. So they get filled either right on the close of the bar, if they buy right before the bar closes, or they get filled on the open of the next bar. Betting that the breakout will fail and that maybe we're getting a higher low major trend reversal. Bull breakout, two-legged pullback, so a large high two buy. Leg one, pullback, leg two. And the bulls who did take that bet, betting the bears would not get good follow through. They won. Above the moving average for 10 or 15 bars. Above a bull flag, bear channel, bull flag. Guess what happens when you get a bear reversal bar near the moving average? The opposite of what I talked about in the bear trend. The bulls will look at that and say, ha, I don't believe it. Most reversal attempts fail. I'm going to buy any big bear bar closing near the moving average. So I'll buy that and I'll buy that. I'll buy that. Because the bears need one more bar to convince traders that the bears have taken control. And because of that, bulls buy those bear bars, betting that instead of a second bear bar, the market will resume back up. Trends constantly try to reverse. But my 80% rule, 80% of reversal attempts fail and become flags. And then the trend resumes. Strong bull trend. Look at all the reversal attempts. Pretty decent bear bars all the way up. But a reversal attempt needs follow through. And the bears are not getting their follow through. And without that follow through, nobody believes the reversal attempt will fail. Typically, at a minimum, traders want to see a bear bar following the breakup. They want this bar, at a minimum, to be a bear bar. And here we could not even get that. Ideally, what the bears want is a second bear bar. They want a big bear bar. They want the bar closing on its low. And then they want a third, fourth, fifth bear bar. But here we've got a bear breakout, terrible follow through. Bear breakout, terrible follow through on the next bar. The bulls see every one of these breakout attempts as the end of a bull flag. So a bull trend, bear channel, bear channel, bull flag. So they look to buy a reversal up. Bear breakout, bull flag. Sideways, bull flag. Pullback, bull flag. The bears see reversals, the bulls see bull flags. And the bulls are looking to buy reversals up. Buying these bear closes, it's slightly lower probability than buying above the bull bar on the reversal up. So the market order has a lower probability of success than the stop order. But the risk is less as well. The bears are hoping for a follow through bar. The bulls buy that bear close. And if the bears get their follow through bar, the bulls exit. So the bulls in general are risking one bar. So aggressive bulls buy the closes, betting that the bears will fail to get their follow through selling. And other bulls who want slightly higher probability. They're willing to pay for it with slightly greater risk, the stop being further away. But it's still just as valid as taking the more aggressive buy at the bear close. One has better probability with worse risk reward. The other has better risk reward and lower probability. A chart is made up of price and time axes. And sometimes a trend can begin more with time than with price. So sometimes the breakout can be small, but it can still lead to a big trend. So here we have a wedge bottom bear channel. Think of it as a bull flag. 75% chance we're going to get a bull breakout. Well, this is the bull breakout. And at this point, it does not look remarkable. But this is what followed. So a lot of times even a single bull bar can be the start of a big trend. So we got a bull bar. We got a follow through bar here. Good for the bulls, but it's just a doji. It really didn't get clear until here where we had a pair of consecutive bull bars closing near their highs. But in any case, a big bull trend can begin with a very small trend. Sometimes a single bull trend bar can be the start of a trend. And then sometimes a series of bull trend bars can be the start of a trend. You know, look at this. From this bar to that bar, no pullback. So it's about a 10 bar bull micro channel. On a higher timeframe chart, this entire rally is a breakout. So if this is a 15 minute chart on a 60 minute chart, or a two hour chart or a three hour chart, it would simply be one, two or three big bull bars closing on their highs. Sometimes a single bull bar can be the start of a breakout. Sometimes a series of bull bars can be the start of a breakout. All trends are in channels. This is a very tight bull channel, but this bull trend is in a channel. This is on the left, a bear channel. Now all reversals are breakouts. Here we have a small bull reversal. And is it a breakout? Well, it is. It's a break above the bear trend line. So it's a break above the channel. And it's also a wedge bottom, or you can see a double bottom with a failed breakout, which is a type of wedge bottom. So every reversal is a breakout of something, even if it's not clear. When you get follow through buying like this, I view this as a give up series of bars. The bears are giving up. And what happens is you got bears who doubt the bull breakout will succeed and they sell, and they sell more higher. And at some point they conclude that they're going to lose money. So they give up. And this pair of bull bars, consecutive bull bars, gap below that bar, the high of this bar. This is probably the give up bar where the bears gave up. They bought back their shorts. And it's also probably where the bulls who are waiting for high probability bought. You have bulls buying here and you have bears buying here. And both are buying aggressively. The bears are desperate to get out of their losing trade before the loss becomes too big. And the bulls at this point realize the market has a high probability of going higher. So they're buying aggressively. And this is what followed. And it created a big bull breakout. Give up bars. The bears finally giving up, taking their losses. And the bulls know the bears are doing that. And the bulls buy aggressively because they know if the bears are buying back their shorts, the bears are not going to sell again one or two bars later. They'll wait for at least several bars. So it's a high probability buy. 60% or higher that there'll be at least some kind of a measured move up. Maybe a measured move based upon the height of this trading range. It obviously went much higher than that. But the context is good for the bulls and they have a good breakout and a good follow-through bar. Chances are 60%. We're going up for some kind of a measured move. Stocks. Here's Amazon. Daily chart of Amazon. Often have big gaps on the open. This day opened far below the low of that day. And you can see there are just gaps in many different places on the chart. Every gap is a breakout and it can succeed or fail. So here we have a big gap down and it ultimately reversed up. Here we have a big gap down, ultimately reversed up. Here we have a small gap up, it reversed down. So any gap, like any other type of breakout, can succeed or fail. And traders look at the price action and try to determine what is more likely, a successful breakout and a new trend or a failed breakout. On Forex charts, gaps are much less common and they're in general not particularly important. Sometimes they are, but for the most part they're not. So a big gap down below yesterday's low. Today's opens down here and that's yesterday's low. Big gap down and it failed. The stronger a breakout is, the more likely it's going to lead to a trend. Here we have a pair of small bull bars, not particularly strong. And then we have a bigger bull bar closing near its high. And we have gaps. This close above that high, this close above that high. And this close way above this high. So the trend is getting stronger. And the entire three bars is also a breakout. This is a breakout. This is a breakout. This is another stronger breakout. And the three bars, some computers look at the entire three bars as a breakout. And here's the follow through bar. The minimum that the bulls want to see is the absence of a bare body. And they got it. They got a bull body. That increases the chances that we'll go higher, even if we pull back first. They got additional follow through buying here and here and then continued follow through buying for the next 20 bars. One big disadvantage of breakouts is the stop is usually far away. I said the probability of making money is high. If you're buying a strong breakout like this for any reason, buy closes, buy at the market, probability of getting some kind of a measured move up is 60% or higher. So what's wrong with the trade? Well, the stop is far away. Anytime you have a high probability trade, you're going to have bad risk reward. Usually that means big risk. The stop is far away. Also, the market suddenly is moving quickly. And unless you've traded a long time, it can be very difficult emotionally. You say, my gosh, I don't know what to do. I'm afraid this is moving so fast. Maybe it'll move just as fast back down. Traders get paralyzed by fear. One of the important things in this course that I talk about all the time is that you're always looking for reasons to trade. There's lots of trading taking place on every bar on every chart. But a lot of times, you don't know what to do. Do I buy at the market? Well, it's good to have behaviors that are fairly easy to execute. And here, this is a good buy the close bull trend. So as soon as you see a bull close, you can buy. If you did not buy that one, you see another one, buy. If you did not take those two, and you see a third one, just hit buy the market and put your stop in the right place. Since your risk is big, you have to trade small. If you're starting out, you look at this and, oh, Al's giving me good advice. I can just buy these closes, put my stop down here, and 60% chance I'm going to get a measured move up. So if I buy here, here's my risk. 60% chance we're going higher. If I buy here, here's my risk. 60% chance we'll get to a measured move based upon this close. Every step of the way. If you buy here, 60% chance it'll go up for a measured move. If you buy here, the breakout's even bigger. So now the target is even higher. If you buy here, the risk is bigger. It's a logical buy. Chances are the target now is even higher. It looks easy to do, right? But it's hard to do emotionally. And it takes a while to get used to it. And the most important thing is to trade the I don't care size. You trade small enough so that you truly do not care if you lose. I always talk about risk. Risk usually means price, dollars, but a component of that can be time. If you feel rushed into making a decision, and it interferes with your ability to make the decision, that is risk. So if you feel pressured, you think that the chance of making a bad decision is higher, that is risk. Now let's say you buy for any reason. Where do you exit? Well, as long as your premise is still valid, you can just keep holding. Some traders will exit and they'll just scalp and buy again, scalp, buy again and scalp. But most traders cannot get back in once they get out. So whenever you have a strong breakout, it's usually better just to put the appropriate stop down there and wait until the trend is no longer a trend. Wait until your premise looks like it's no longer valid and then get out. I said, you can buy for any reason. You can buy at the market. You can buy a bull breakout. You can buy a follow through bar. You can buy more follow through. You can buy with a limit order at the low of this bar betting the reversal attempt will fail. You can buy with stops above these bars. It does not matter. But because the stop is far away, you have to trade small. And a strong bull trend has a high probability of continuing up. So the later you enter, the higher up you're being forced to buy. You always have to be thinking out your position size and you have to adjust it based upon your stock. If you're thinking also that, hey, I'm going to buy this close. And if it drops all the way down here, I'm going to buy more. Then you have to do the math and pick a position size that's small enough so that if you buy and buy more lower and get stopped out, you do not lose more than on any other trade. Then profit target. On a high probability trade, all you need is a reward equal to one times your actual risk. Your initial risk is here. But if you bought here, the market kept going up. Your initial risk was just a tiny bit. Do you get out that tiny bit higher? No, because there's always a minimum. In the Forex market, you never want to take less than a 10 pip profit on a five minute chart. And in the E-mini, you never want to get out with less than a point. But again, when you have a 60% chance of a measured move up, I would not recommend scalping. Unless you're really good at getting back in, I would just buy and hold. In this video, I talked about the importance of follow through after a breakout. If the follow through bar is in the same direction as the breakout bar, higher probability the trend will continue at least a little bit. Because trends are always trying to reverse, traders will bet that the reversals will fail. So if you have a bull trend and then a bear bar, bulls will buy that bear close. If you have a bear trend and a bull bar, traders will sell that close. Finally, breakouts can be small. They can be as small as a single small bear bar or bull bar. And they can also be large. They can also be made up of many small bars. They come in many different types. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on breakouts.