 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on major trend reversals. I'll begin by talking about moving average gap bars where there's a gap between the bar and the moving average. If you have a bear trend and you see a moving average gap bar, a bar above the moving average, it usually leads to the final leg of the bear trend. And finally, most tops are double tops. There's a top and then a reversal, and then the bull trend tries to resume. And if that second rally fails, you get the reversal. Most tops require some kind of a test of the prior high before the market will enter an opposite trend. Here we have a bull trend. But then look at what took place here. We have a bear breakout below the bull trend line. And look at the high of this bar and look at the moving average. The high of the bar is below the moving average. The bears were so strong that they were able to put a bar completely below the moving average. That is an early sign that the bears might be able to take control. There's a gap between the high of the bar and the moving average. This is a moving average gap bar. You can see the gap, the space between the bar and the moving average. It's a warning that the bears are getting strong. They're strong enough now not only to get a close below the moving average, but an entire bar below the moving average. The rally after a gap bar is usually the final leg of the bull trend. And then the market either enters a trading range or you get a reversal. In this case we got a small double top lower high major trend reversal. So it's a short below that bar or below this bar. Traders know it's still a bull trend. However, they know that whatever rally that follows this probably will be followed by a major trend reversal attempt. Here it's a lower high. It could have been a higher high. But in any case, once you see a bar completely below the moving average, you know the bears are getting strong. And you're probably transitioning from a bull trend into either a trading range or a bear trend. Because of the strength of the bears and the loss of strength on the part of the bulls, traders expect a trading range or a bear trend. In either case, they want to sell high. They'll look for reversals up to fail and either lead to a trading range or a bear trend. They'll sell rallies. A major trend reversal, you need two things. You need context. The bars to the left have to give you a reasonable chance of a reversal. And you want a good signal bar. If you're selling in a bull trend, you want a good sell signal bar to increase the chances of a profitable trade. Here we have a bull trend, a bear breakout. The bears are strong. And we have gap bars, a series of bars with highs below the moving average. The bears are strong enough now to put bars completely below the moving average. Probably, whatever bull trend resumption we get after these gap bars will lead to the final leg of the bull trend. And the bull trend will either transition into a trading range or reverse into a bear trend. When you get the break below the bull trend line, at a minimum, you'd like to see a series of bear bars, five or ten bear bars. You prefer the reversal down to hit the moving average, but it's not always the case. You expect the bull trend to resume. It resumed here. It resumed again here. However, you're expecting it to fail around the prior high. Here we had a lower high major trend reversal. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder, head and shoulders top. And we got two legs down from the wedge. So wedge top, two legs down. And the bull trend resumed after a series of gap bars. Gap bars usually lead to a major trend reversal. We had a lower high major trend reversal attempt here. We have gap bars. So the next rally probably will lead to another attempt. So we have a head and shoulders top and a wedge top. Wedge top, head and shoulders top. That failed. And these bars tell us that whatever rally we get from here will probably fail again. So now we have consecutive tops. We tried to top out here. We have a new high. Probably going to try to top out here because we had bears strong enough to put bars completely below the moving average. Moving average gap bars. When traders see this rally, they're going to look to short. Will they short below this bull bar? No. It's a surprise. It's breaking above the right shoulder of a head and shoulders top. There probably will be at least two legs up. One pull back two. However, after that second leg up, traders will look to short, especially if there's a decent sell signal bar like this, a bear bar closing on its low. We have a bull trend. A test of the moving average. Six consecutive bear bars. A sign of strength on the part of the bears. Bears will look to sell. Head and shoulders top. Lower high major trend reversal. Reasonable to sell here or here. But the sell failed. And now we have a consecutive top. We tried to top out here. A wedge. Tried to top out here. Lower high major trend reversal. And now we're trying to top again. Traders will sell the lower high major trend reversal. And now we have a high two bull flag. Leg one, pull back leg two. After a wedge top, we're probably going to try to get trend resumption. And we have moving average gap bars. Usually the first time you get bars below the moving average and a bull trend, the bull trend will resume. So traders will look to buy a reversal up from these gap bars. The bears are sold here. We'll get out here. And bulls will look to buy as well, expecting at least one more leg up. You can redraw the trend line. This low, that low. We broke below the new trend line. Traders will look to sell. A reversal down after testing the prior high. Here the test is slightly above. So it's a higher high major trend reversal. And it has a decent sell signal bar. Context. The bars to the left support a likely reversal. And signal bar. Most tops are variations of a double top. You have a top. The bears try to reverse. The first reversal usually is minor. And then the bull trend resumes. If it reverses down a second time, that has a higher probability of leading to an opposite trend, a major reversal. We have a bull trend. And then we have a reversal down. This is testing this. So this is a double top with this. It's slightly below. We have a new high, a higher high. This is reversing down again. It's a double top with this. So it's testing the trend high. So a higher high major trend reversal is a type of double top where the second high is higher. A lower high major trend reversal is a double top where the second high is lower. Sometimes you get perfect double tops, but they're rare. This could have been close to a perfect double top. This was slightly above that. Perfect double tops are rare because to get it to exactly the same price is unusual. Normally it's a little bit above, higher high, or a little bit below, lower high. A lower high major trend reversal, a type of double top. Higher high major trend reversal, a type of double top. This is also a breakout above a head and shoulders top. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. It tried to get the bear breakout. It broke below the neckline, but reversed up strongly. Two legs up. After the second leg up, traders will look to sell. The principle is the same. We have a bull trend that tried to reverse down. The bull trend resumed up, testing the prior high. And traders will look for a reversal down again. The first reversal down, usually a minor reversal, and leads to a trading range. But the second reversal, there's a reasonable chance of getting a major reversal. Here, 40% chance of a bear trend or a bear swing. It did not become a bear trend. The bull trend resumed. Again, 40% chance of a bear trend or a bear swing. And this time, it succeeded. Major trend reversal bottoms. They're all simply variations of double bottoms. We have a bear trend. We have a breakout. We tested the bear trend low and reversed up from a higher low. You can call this a bear trend. And this a break up low, possibly a final flag, and a reversal up. This is a double bottom with this. We tried to reverse up, failed. And we're trying to reverse up a second time. So this is a test of that low. And it's a double bottom, slightly lower low. The bulls tried for a reversal and failed. The bear trend resumed. But the resumption did not last long. It simply tested the old low. And then we have another reversal attempt, even stronger. This is a slightly higher low, but it's a double bottom. Lower low, major trend reversal. Higher low, major trend reversal. This is a double bottom with that. We have a new low in the bear trend. This is a test of this. It's a double bottom with this. Slightly higher low. As well as this. This is another attempt by the bears to resume the bear trend. You can call it a double bottom with this low or with this low. And there's another bigger higher low, major trend reversal. So bear trend, very strong bull breakout. The bears tried to reverse, but could not get down to the old bear low. It's a big double bottom. A higher low double bottom. But it's still a double bottom. This higher low, major trend reversal. It is a higher probability by because this breakout is so strong. Chances are the market will either be in a trading range and no longer in a bear trend. Or it will be the start of a bull trend. And you're starting to get bull bars here. Probability that this bear breakout will fail is good. The market did not fall below the bottom of this very strong bull breakout. This bear breakout is failing and it's failing again. Bulls will buy. Betting that this bear breakout is a bear trap. Trapping traders into selling. And we've got a higher low above this low. Higher low above that low. Higher low above this low. And a reasonable buy for a high probability buy for a swing up. The principle is the same with this, with this, with this. These are all major trend reversals. The market is testing the low of the bear trend and deciding whether it will break to a new low or reverse up. We tested the low, reverse up. Tested the low, reverse up. Tested the low, reverse up. Here we have a bull trend and a bear break below the bull channel. You can call this a double top. It's actually slightly higher than that. It doesn't matter what you call it. It's a major trend reversal attempt. Double tops are rarely perfect. They're usually at least a little bit above, a little bit below. Sometimes a lot below. Sometimes a lot above. But this is a double top or a higher high major trend reversal. Bull trend here. First reversal down, probably minor. Continued bull trend here. First reversal down, probably minor. Bull flag or a trading range. Traders will look for the bull trend to resume, but they'll be ready for the resumption to fail around the prior high. And they'll look to sell a reversal down because it would then be a major trend reversal. Forty percent chance you'll get a swing trade. Again, it doesn't matter if you call it a higher high or a double top. It's an attempt by the bulls to resume the trend and it's failing again around the prior high. So it's a double top. It's a sell. We have a bull trend. The market went sideways for a lot of bars. And here we even broke below the moving average and we have a moving average gap bar. A gap between the high of the bar and the moving average. The sign of strong bears. The pullback here did not quite reach the moving average even though we pulled back from the bull trend for 11 bars. 11 bars in a tight trading range. The market's neutral, but traders expect that the bull trend will resume, which it did. We got a double top. Major trend reversal. I don't know if it's perfect. I don't know if it's a little bit above, a little bit below. Let's call it a double top. A reasonable sell. However, you have to be suspicious. Not much selling pressure. Only two decent bear bars and a tight trading range did not even pull back to the moving average. This is a lower probability short. Probably less than 40% chance of a major reversal. Ultimately, it led to a major reversal. But we had this very strong attempt at bull trend resumption before we got the trend reversal down. Most bears who took this short probably would get out above this bar. A moving average gap bar and a bull trend. They expect a test of the bull trend high. However, they'll be ready to short again. A small double top. Try to resume up. Try to resume up a second time. Traders will look to sell below the low of the prior bar. If the bull trend fails twice trying to go up, maybe it'll go in the other direction. Especially since the context supports a reversal. We've broken below the bull trend line and now we have a gap bar. A bar completely below the moving average. A sign the bears are getting strong. Not a very strong sell signal bar. Just a doji. Not a very strong sell signal bar here. A bull bar. Some bears would sell below the low of that bull bar because of the double top. Others will sell below a bear bar like maybe below this neckline of this double top. And you can see a lot of traders sold. It looks like a lot of them sold with a stop below this bear bar. These are not high probability shorts. Maybe about 40%. However, once you see this, we have a series of bear bars. Again, I could draw a trend line here and this is a break below the trend line. It's also a break below here. It's also the entry for a reasonable lower high major trend reversal. Once you see three bear bars closing on their lows, this bar closing below this low and closing below the low of the past 30 bars or so, the market's clearly always in short. The odds are there will be at least a small second leg down. Here there was a big second leg down. Higher probability to sell after you see the big breakout. Whenever you take a higher probability sell, the stop is usually further away. A higher probability sell is usually a breakout and that means the stop is going to be far. That's the trade off. You can take the lower probability short with low risk or you can wait for the breakout in the market to become clearly bearish and then sell. You have a much higher chance of success, but the stop is further away. The same with selling down here. You could sell any of these closes. High probability we're going at least a little bit lower, but the trade off for high probability shorts, the stop is further away. Worse risk reward. A pullback from this very strong bear breakout. A good sell signal bar. This is a good short. Stop either above this high or above here. Double top major trend reversal. Lower high major trend reversal. For a reversal, you need signs that the bears are strong. Traders have to believe that the bears are strong enough to take control over the market and create a swing down. We've got a pullback to near the moving average. That is a sign of strength. The bears could control the market for about 8 or 10 bars here. That's good, but not much selling pressure. A break below a bull trend line. That's a sign of strong bears. A bull trend line. A break below the bull trend line. Another sign of strong bears. Here, we also broke below the moving average. We closed below the moving average here, here, and here. Three closes below the moving average. Also signs of strong bears. If the selling pressure is not particularly good, the reversal down probably will be minor. Even this does not have much selling pressure. And we got a strong breakout, but the reversal was minor. The bull trend resumed and we got a trading range. However, two big bear bars. Three closes below the moving average. And now a moving average gap bar. The bears are getting strong. Higher probability that the reversal up will fail. And the bears will get a major trend reversal down. By higher probability, it's still only 40% until you get that or that. At this point, it's 60% that we're going at least a little lower. And selling any of these closes, 60% chance you make money if you manage the trade correctly. All charts have two variables. There's a horizontal axis and a vertical axis. Usually the horizontal axis is time and the vertical axis is price. Bears can show strength by moving price quickly in their direction. But they can also show strength just by time. Owning a lot of bars. Preventing the bull trend from resuming up for a lot of bars. And that is often sufficient for a major reversal. A sufficient sign of strength on the part of the bears. Tight trading range. 10 or more bars. Even though the bars are weak, it's still enough evidence that the bears can stop the bull trend. At least for a lot of bars. And sometimes that can lead to a major reversal. They can show strength based on price. Moving the price down quickly here and here. Bears are strong based on time. Owning a lot of bars. Stopping the bull trend for a lot of bars. Or based on price. A quick move down. Big bear trend bars. In a bull trend, you should always be drawing bull trend lines. Before there's a sell off. We broke below the line. A very tight bull channel. Any reversal is probably minor. Which means probably leading to a bull flag. And then the bull trend will resume. As soon as you get another reversal up, you can keep drawing lines. We have two reversals up here. You can draw a line. We have a reversal up here. You could draw a line this low and that low. And we get a bear break below it. The trend line serves as a reminder that if there's a break below the line and then the bull trend resumes, you might get a major trend reversal. If the bears are strong enough to break below a line, they might be strong enough to create a reversal. Ideally, you want a very big breakout far below the line. That is a sign of very strong bears. And it increases the chances that if the bull trend resumes, the resumption will fail and you'll get a reversal down. The bull trend resumed, but it began to reverse down and then it reversed down strongly after a test of the prior bull high. At this point, the reversal has become a major reversal. We're probably in a bear trend. We're clearly in a bear trend. Double top, major trend reversal. You can take that short. Not yet high probability. While the bears own the market for about 8 or 10 bars, not much in terms of big bear bars. They're controlling the market in terms of time, but not in terms of price. Whenever there's a double top or a higher high major trend reversal, and then you get a bear breakout, it's usually followed by a lower high major trend reversal and a second leg down. Here's a second leg down. It's strong enough so that it will also probably have at least one more leg down. And that lower high is another opportunity to sell. I talked about moving average gap bars. For example, if you're in a bull trend and the bears get a reversal down and they put a bar completely below the moving average. The high of the bar is below the moving average. There's a gap between the high of the bar and the moving average. That's a sign of strong bears. It usually leads to the final leg of the bull trend before the bears attempt a major trend reversal. Finally, I talked about how most tops are double tops. It doesn't matter if it's a higher high or a lower high. It's a variation of a double top. Most bottoms are double bottoms. Most major reversal bottoms are double bottoms. It can be a perfect double bottom, rare. Or it could be a higher low. It could be a lower low. But most major trend reversals at the low come from some kind of a double bottom. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on major trend reversals. I'm Al resulting in the results of a lower range trend reversals. Now, I'd like to do a follow. I had a pocketizontal hepsantyftfta�m. How much heal is a google change center? Here's the joke about the detriment. I can do this kind ofабот sowie the roeder work of the MERebus icon Department. I'm the lead at the kader inferior burgers. I'm then going to need some Velocating Yupim'io at the inside of the bar including