 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading breakouts. I think stock management is important with all trades. I'll talk about that for breakout trades today. And I also want to talk about different ways to sell. The market's obviously in a bear trend for most of the bars on this chart. And although the bulls broke above the bear channel, there was a very strong reversal down. And we have a pair of big bear bars closing near their lows. The market is clearly short and the odds are it'll go at least a little bit lower. What do you do? You have to sell. The stop is obvious. No matter where you decided that the market is trying to go down, you know where the stop has to be. It doesn't matter if you entered here on this close and at the market here on the breakout below that trading range. At this close, the stop is up here at the top of the major lower high. By the close of this bar, everyone knows that the market is short. And everyone knows that the odds are the market's going lower. And everyone knows that the best stop is above the top of the sell climax, the bear reversal. You could put it above the two bar bear breakout. I would simply put it above the top of the entire leg down. You can look at that and say, oh my gosh, that's 15 points above. I can't risk that much. If you cannot risk that much, don't take the trade. But if you are able to risk that much, then it's a reasonable trade and you have to decide how to get short. There are many ways to do it. For example, you could sell the close. You could sell below bars. You could sell above bars. You could sell about a 50% pullback here. Once you decide that the market is going down and you decide that you can use the stop, that your account is big enough, and emotionally you can risk that much, then you have to get short. If you wait more than a bar or two after this close, you should simply sell a small position at the market and put your stop up here because the market may not pull back for a long time. Here it did pull back, but it might instead have simply gone straight down. One of the reasons that the market sometimes does go straight down is because of FOMO, fear of missing out. Traders are afraid that if they wait for a pullback, it might not come for a long time. If they sell, they'll probably make a profit even if it reverses on them because the reversal probably will be minor and the trend will resume. And therefore, everyone selling at least a little bit can result in the trade simply working right away. And because you have the potential for a FOMO sell-off here, a very strong breakout, everybody knows the market's going lower. It's important, I think, to get short, either sell the close or sell for any reason. Obvious choice is you see the close of the big bear bar and you place a limit order to sell the close or right before the close, you sell the market. Or right as soon as the bar closes, you sell the market and get filled on the next bar. What's happening here? We've got three pushes down. Sell climax, pause, sell climax, bull bar, sell climax. It's possible a wedge reversal. However, when the channel down is tight like this, the reversal is probably minor. If the bulls get a couple big bull bars totally undoing this bear breakout, then they can make it back to always in long. But if the bars are smaller, have tails, and have bad follow-through, it's probably a minor reversal and it will lead to a test back down to that close and maybe a resumption of the bear trend. It's reasonable to exit above the high of this bar. It's also reasonable to stay short and keep your stop up here. If you do exit, if you're a swing trader, you have to be willing to sell again, either below a bear bar here for a double top bear flag or below a bear bar here or a second entry short after this breakout or the close of that bear bar. Or now we have a double top here, sell below that bear bar. We have a low one, low two, below this bear bar. You have to be able to sell again. If you find that you get out of trades like this and are unable to get short again and then you miss the swing down here, you have to think seriously about not getting out here and simply holding short and relying on your stock. A bull breakout, terrible follow through and now a second entry short. A micro double top here, about a 50% pullback, a test of yesterday's close. It's reasonable to take the short. This is not enough to flip the market to always in the long. Consecutive bull bars, not big relative to the bear bars, tails on the top of both bars, bad follow through and then a second entry short. It's also a 50% pullback of the initial sell-off and a lot of traders will sell here. Bull scalpers who bought here will be looking to take profits around here, thinking that the reversal up is probably going to be minor after a very tight bear channel. Probably the best the bulls get is a trading range or a resumption of the bear trend. There are lots of different reasonable stops that you can use if you sell for any reason. So let's say you sell this close. One choice is simply to use a money stop. You can say, well, that's 15 points. I don't want to risk that much. Maybe I'll risk 5 points or 10 points. Or maybe I'll risk to just above a 50% pullback. At this point, a 50% pullback is around here. So you put a stop a little bit above that 50% pullback. At this point, the 50% pullback is here. You could put a stop a little bit above that. The best stop, I think, for most traders is the obvious one at the top of the bear leg. Alternatively, you could put a stop above the top of the bear breakout. Chances are, if this is the start of a bear trend, like a spike pullback channel, it will not get back above the high of this bear breakout. And the price is not much different from using the top of the bear trend. So this is a reasonable alternative. This bar as well is another strong breakout bar. And if you're thinking that you don't want to risk all the way up here, that would be another choice for a stop. If you do get stopped out, you can always sell again. Whatever stop you use, the tighter it is, the less you lose per trade, but the more often you lose. If you use a very wide stop, you'll rarely ever get stopped out. But when you do get stopped out, you'll lose a lot of money. The key is to do something that is reasonable. If you use a tight stop, that's not reasonable. You're going to get stopped out all the time. If you use an extremely wide stop, that's not reasonable as well, because you're going to lose a very large amount of money occasionally. If you take 100 trades and choose among the reasonable stops, your profit will be about the same, whether you choose a tighter stop or the wider stop. Now, let's say you sold this close and you risked one or two ticks. Is that reasonable? Of course not. You're going to get stopped out 90% of the time, and you're going to lose money. Now, let's say, alternatively, use an extremely wide stop like 50 points, three or four times the height of this bear breakout. That, obviously, is not reasonable either, and you're going to lose money. Some traders prefer a high probability of winning, and they'll use a wider stop. Other traders prefer to risk less and then sell again if they get stopped out. Let's say you sold the breakout below the trading range, or you sold this close, or you sold above this reversal, or you sold below this bear flag, double top bear flag, another low two short. Let's say you took that short. Let's say you sold this bull close betting against the reversal. Let's say you took the second entry short for the breakout above this lower high. It doesn't matter. Any one of these shorts, the stop is the same. It's the same trade. You're just putting it on at different times. A person who sold here, and he held through all of this, has the same trade as a person who did not sell here, and instead sold here. They're getting in at the same price. The market has not done anything in the meantime to make them change the location of their stop. The stop is still here. Your stop placement has nothing to do with where you enter. It has to do with what the market did before you entered, and it's usually better to put your stop above the top of the most recent major swing down, because if you're betting on a swing, the market needs to get lower highs. If it gets above a major lower high like this, then your premise of a bear trade, a swing down, is wrong, and you need to get out. A strong breakout, especially to a new low. Traders lower their stop to above the most recent lower high. At this point, we have a strong breakout, new low. The stop goes above the top of the high. It's a major lower high. You can call it a bear breakout, and it is a breakout. We broke below the trading range. You can call it a failed bull breakout. You can call it a reversal down after a bull breakout. It does not matter. Anytime you see a big bear trend bar, it's a breakout. It's a sell climax. It doesn't matter. You have a pair of bear bars. In this particular context, you can call it a reversal. We tried to break above the channel, and we reversed down. But I would just call that a bear breakout. The market has another bear breakout here. It's reasonable to take the short. But where do you take the stop? It's a strong bear breakout, and it's a new low. Is it a major lower high? Well, look to the left. You're still in a fairly tight channel. This is probably a minor lower high, and the most recent major lower high is up here. In other words, the market could get above this bar, and the market could still be in a bear trend. In this particular context, yes, this is a big bear bar, but it's still in this bear channel, and it's small compared to this bear breakout. I think this lower high is minor compared to this one, and therefore, this is not a good location for a stop for a swing trader. If you're a swing trader, you're betting on a swing down, a bear trend. It's a bear trend as long as it keeps making lower highs, major lower highs. If it gets above this area, this major lower high, clearly your premise is wrong, and you don't want to be short, because if it gets above this high, your idea that we're in a bear trend is wrong. It's no longer a bear trend. It's either a bull trend or a trading range. In either case, that is not why you entered the trade. You entered the trade because you believed it was in a bear trend, and if it gets above this high, then you're wrong, and therefore, you have to exit your trade. Can you get out above this high? Like I said, if you get out for any reason other than a clear reversal into a bull trend or the market hitting your stop, you have to be prepared to sell again because the market's still short. Here, a second entry short for the failed bull breakout above that minor high. If you sell below this bull bar, can you put your stop above the double top? You probably can, but it's probably better to still use the wider stop. Let's say after the close of this bar, can you put your stop up here? That's probably reasonable, but it's still a fairly minor lower high. We did not get a new low, even though it's a pair of good bear bars, and it totally reverses this pair of good bull bars. The market could get one more leg up and then a resumption down. If you do get stopped out, if this rally were to go above this sell climax and you got stopped out, you would still sell again on a reversal back down as long as we stayed below the top of this bear trend. Here's another sell. Let's say you sold here. We have a micro double top, a bear bar. Let's say you sell there. We have a bear breakout, not particularly big. You might put your stop up here. The bull's trying to get a reversal, and now we've traded down about 10 bars. You might put your stop up here. You may keep it up here. All three are reasonable. If you use a tighter stop, like above this bear bar, this bear bar, or this bear bar, you're going to lose more often, but your losses will be small. It's reasonable to do that. I want to talk some about how to sell. Strong bear reversal. We tried to get a bull breakout. We gapped up on the open above yesterday's close. And above a bear channel. And then reverse down very strongly. You could sell the close of that bar, even though it's at the moving average. However, that is the simplest thing to do. Just when you see the strong bear close, just sell the close. If you want, you could wait for another bear bar. At this point, it's a higher probability that we're going to fall for some kind of remeasured move. Or you could wait for the bar afterwards and sell the close of that bar as long as it did not have a bull body. When I say sell the close, I mentioned a moment ago that it means different things. Some traders will sell at the market or with a limit order a second or two before the bar closes. Some will sell as soon as the bar closes and they'll get filled on the open of the next bar. Some will place a limit order. As soon as this bar closes, they place a limit order to sell at that close. The risk is you miss the trade. If the high of this bar does not get above that close, you will not get filled. Here's an example. Let's say this bear bar. You thought, okay, we're going down. I'm just going to place a limit order to sell at the close of this bar when the next bar opens. So when this bar closes, you place your limit order to sell at its close and look at the high of the next bar. It never went above that close and therefore you did not get short. If you kept your limit order, this high looks like it's possibly above that close. You would have been filled over here. But that's your risk and a very strong bear trend. Sometimes if you place a limit order to sell at the close of a bar, the next bar will not get above your limit order and you will not get filled. At this point, and certainly by this point, the market is clearly always in short and you have to get short. You have to do something to get short. And as I say, one of the easiest ways to do it is as soon as you see a strong bear close, just sell the market and use the appropriate stop. Sell the close bears, strong bear bar. They just sell the close of a strong bear bar all the way down. They don't take all of these cells, but they take at least one. And some aggressive traders will add on as the trend goes their way. Let's say he sells this close and then he sees the market doing this. He might sell more here. Another breakout, he might add to his position here. He would be scaling into a winning trade instead of scaling into a losing trade. The important point is you have to get short. And all of these bear closes are reasonable entry places. You have to be very careful about a sell the close trend or buy the close trend that begins in the final hour. You have to be prepared to exit very quickly on a reversal. You can see the video on trading at the end of the day for more information about what I'm talking about. Today is not an example of that. But you could argue this is sell the close and we're very close to the final hour. If you do sell that close, you're going to make some quick decisions once you see it start to reverse. Sell the close bears. They're looking to sell very strong bear bars, especially a series of very strong bear bars closing on or near their lows. And they'll continue to sell all the way down. Some will sell and then take profits, sell and take profits. Others will sell and then once the market goes their way, they'll sell more. Most traders take one entry, they'll sell one of these, doesn't matter which one, and then just swing trade it. So if they sell anywhere in here, they'll put a stop up here and then they'll just hold on. I had a friend, I traded with him for several years. In a market like this, he would just take a trade and then he would place a stop and he'd place a profit target, a measure move down, and then he would go out. He lived on a lake and he'd go out on the lake and row his canoe for a couple of hours and then come back later. So he'd come back somewhere near here and he'd say, oh, Al, I've almost reached my profit. Or sometimes he would have reached his profit and he'd be back to flat. And he'd say, oh, it looks like I've made money. I traded with the fellow for several years online and I don't ever remember him once losing money doing that. He'd go on errands, he'd take his mother to the doctor's office, he'd go to Walmart. He'd just disappear every day in the middle of the day. Once he sees what he thought was a trend day, he would place his order to get in, he'd place his stop and he'd place a limit order to take profits and then come back a couple hours later. Some traders sell every close. If they have a big enough account, they can just keep selling all the way down. I don't know anyone who has done that. One of my goals in life is to someday do that and just keep selling, selling, selling, selling, selling and sell 10 times. I've never done it, but at some point in life, I hope to do that at least once. Why do you think this bar looks like this? Why is it a big bear bar closing on its low? It's because the institutions are selling, especially right before the close of the bar. They believe the market's going down and they want to get short. And they also want the bar to look bearish because they want other people to look at the chart and say, yeah, it's going down, I've got to sell. Strong bear breakout. If you want, you can go to bear reversal. A common problem is traders look at that and say, oh my gosh, I want to sell, but my shop is way up here. That's more than I want to risk. I'm going to wait for a pullback. But the problem, as I said earlier, is it may not pull back for a lot of bars. It may just keep working lower and lower and lower and then you find yourself missing a huge bear trend. Your desire to reduce your risk, avoid putting a stop all the way up here, results in you missing the best part of a big trend. As soon as you think the market cycle has changed into a strong breakout and the market's always in short, you should really force yourself to at least sell a small position if you can use the appropriate stop. If the stop is too far and it makes you too nervous, do not take the trade. Then wait for a pullback. Beginners are always looking for perfect trades. And the reality is nothing is ever more than 60% certain. If you sell this close, well, there's a 60% chance you're going to make a measured move down before it gets up here. And that's as good as it gets as a trader. And if you're trying to be a trader, you got to take the trades, assuming you can use the appropriate stop. If you cannot use the appropriate stop, don't worry about it. Do not take the trade. Just wait. Again, if you cannot decide how to sell, or if you're taking two bars, three bars, four bars, waiting to decide, simply sell at the market and use the correct stop. For example, you sell the close and you say the stop is really far. Well, trade really small, but just get short. What about selling bear flags, pullbacks, like low one, low two, low threes, wedges, triangles? You can do it for swing trades or for scalps. The probability is high enough for scalps if you use the appropriate stop, a swing stop. Here, we have a resumption of the bear trend. We have a double top. You can call it a low two, low one, low two. If you want, you can call it a low one, bear trend down to here and a pullback, low one. You can call it a low two here, a low one, low two. It doesn't matter what you call it. It's a bear flag. If you take that short and then you see the failed low two bar right here, low one, low two, you can get out above this bar or you could rely on your stop. And then here, we have a bigger nested low two, leg one, pullback, leg two. And this was subdivided into a low one, low two. And then this subdivided into a low one, low two. So it's a larger low one, low two. Again, it doesn't matter what you call it. The key point is it's still always in short. This bull reversal is small relative to the bear breakout and it's simply a 50% pullback and a test of yesterday's close. The market's still always in short and therefore, it's still likely to go down. Another bear breakout, rally, low one, rally again, low two, another low two short. If you want, you can call it a triangle. It's a tight trading range. Three pushes up, bull bar and then bear bar. A couple of bull bars, bear bar, bull bar. So selling below that bull bar would be a low three short, tight trading range or a triangle. Here, we went up, we went down, we went up again. We have a bear bar, bear inside bar. It's a low two short, low one below that bull bar. Bull's trying to resume again, low two here. Choose one entry. It doesn't matter which one. And once you choose the entry, you can always look to the left and find an obvious stop location. And it doesn't matter which of these entries you took, it's appropriate to use this stop up here. At some point, after a number of bars or a bear breakout here, you can lower your stop when the market's in a very strong bear trend, a lot of times it will have a series of low ones before the market weakens enough to start forming low twos. As trends progress, the pullbacks become more complex. So instead of a low one, you might get a low two. Instead of a low two, you might get a low three. And also, the reversals tend to become deeper. Is this a major reversal? Probably not. It's a very tight bear channel. Even though it's a strong reversal, it's still probably minor, which means probably the best the bears get is a trading range. Very tight bear channel. The reversal is probably minor. Probably the best the bulls get is a trading range. And the bears will probably get at least a test back down to the bear trend low. This is the bear trend low. Reversal attempt minor. And therefore, bears will sell bull closes or they'll sell above bull bars, betting that the reversal will be minor and that either the market will go straight down or if it goes up, it'll come back down to the low later on as part of a trading range. Sell a breakout, betting that the breakout will fail to get very far up and the bears will win and the market will resume down. And you can sell above bars. Here we have a bull breakout and a pullback to a bull flag. The bulls want a measured move up to the high and the bears are betting that the bull breakout will fail and the bear trend will resume. So you're selling above what you believe is a bad bull flag. Also, as I said, it's about a 50% pullback. Here's the top of the bear trend, the bottom of the bear trend. Here's a 50% pullback. Some traders will place a limit order to sell right there at 50%. Others will sell on a reversal down here or a second entry short here. You can also sell at a fixed number of points above the current low, like one point above, two points above, four points above, ten points above. All of those are popular areas for traders to sell. This is ten points above the low. Chances are the reversal is minor and will not get much higher than that. So some bears will simply place a limit order to sell ten points above this low. You can also sell ten points above an important close or ten points above a high, like the buy signal bar high, thinking that the bulls who take the buy, if they get ten points, they're going to take profits. When you see the market is clearly always in short and the reversal down is strong, the odds are you're going to get a swing down. This is so extreme, it might go sideways first, but the odds are we'll get trend resumption down. I think it's important to try to swing at least part of your position. If you keep scalping out, that's okay as long as you can keep selling again. One of the reasons scalpers have a hard time making as much as swing traders during a trend like this is the scalper gets worn out. They'll take one or two scalps and they'll be too emotionally exhausted to get back short and they'll end up missing a lot of the trade. I think the best approach for most traders in a situation like this is just use the appropriate stock, which is often wide, and hold short until there's clearly a major reversal up or a major reversal setup. In a very tight channel like this, all of these reversals are minor. In the final hour after a channel is looking fairly weak, a lot of overlap, the absence of consecutive bear bars, big bear bars, you're probably going to get some profit taking and therefore it's reasonable to look to exit your swing trade in the final hour or near the final hour, either here or here because a lot of firms are going to do that and you could give back a lot of your profit if you keep holding. A two bar reversal, a decent buy signal bar right around the start of the final hour. We have a bear breakout below the bear channel and we're trying to reverse up. It's still a minor reversal but it could go far enough up to erase a lot of your profits at the end of the day. A lot of firms will be taking profits. Here we've got leg one, pullback leg two. We're right around the leg one, leg two measured move as well. We have a gap between this low and that high. Here's the height of the range and we're right around a measured move down. Even though it's still always in short, it's reasonable to look to exit. We're at different measured move targets, bottom of the channel, final hour, reasonable to get out either here or above that bull bar. Even though this may be another bear flag and the market might continue down, this looks like a bear leg in what will become a trading range and you will get profit taking at the end of the day in a trend that looks like this, a trend where you're lacking consecutive big bear bars, especially since you're at support. I began by talking about stops. If you're talking about a bear trend, you always want to put your stop above the top of the most recent major lower high. When you're in a bear trend and the market's clearly in a breakout and the probability is high that it's going lower, there are many ways to sell. And the key is if you can look at the stop and say, yes, I can risk that much, then you have to get short, certainly within a bar or two or three of you deciding that the market is clearly always in short. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading breakouts. this is the fourth. on trading breaks into half. maintenance, I'm able to catch up this far about selling and land and that'll use of a Con Route running super and their lens be<|ms|>. They're too soon to get featured in the future. That's in the spirit and the sidewalk they put it that way because they don't see the wheels here, and the magazines or they filter are different from that it