 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching The Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of six videos on trading the Open. Why trade the Open? Because it has a high probability of having a swing trade where a trader can make at least four points. I want to talk a little bit about some common patterns that traders should look for on the Open. For all traders, stop orders in general are better than limit and market orders. For beginners, traders should only trade with stop orders. I want to talk a little bit about the most important rule in trading, and that is that traders have to be prepared for anything. Everybody should be looking for swing trades, and they are usually easiest to find in the Open, because there is a high chance of a swing trade occurring sometime in the first hour or two. We have a pair of bull bars, each closing on their highs after a gap down. Here is the average price. Traders will buy the close of that second bull bar, betting that it might be the beginning of a swing up. Parabolic wedge top, traders will sell, hoping for a swing down. We have a double top, both with good sell signal bars. And now we have consecutive bear bars closing on their lows. A second entry sell below that bar. Traders will either sell below that bar, or they will sell a close, or they will sell below a pullback. This bull bar is a pullback from these consecutive bear bars. We have a double bottom. We have a minor reversal, and now a double bottom. Traders will buy back their shorts. Aggressive bulls might buy, looking for at least a trade up. The market rallied strongly, sold off strongly, and now has a good bull bar closing on its high. The bulls are hoping for a double bottom. They will buy above that bull bar for a swing up. Remember, a strong move on the Open, 50% chance it is going to reverse. And if you get a good reversal bar like this, a bull inside bar closing on its high, it's a reliable buy for a trade up. Now we have a double top here and here below the moving average, and a micro double top with a bear bar closing on its low. The bulls who bought will get up below that bear bar if they did not already take profits up near the moving average. Reversal down, reversal down, reversal down. Trading range high or low. Low or high here. Decent sell signal bar here at the moving average. Reasonable sell, looking for a swing down. Big gap up above the moving average. Two legs down, one pull back two. It's subdivided into a wedge. We rallied, we bounced, and we're trying to bounce above the moving average with a good bull bar. A reasonable buy for a possible low of the day. It was the low for the next several hours, but not the low of the day. A pair of bear bars reversing down, reversing down at the high of the day. Reasonable to exit longs at that point. We're below the moving average, probably gapped down. And now we have a double top. Slightly higher high double top. Below the moving average with a bear bar closing on its low. A reasonable short for a possible swing down. Later in the day, we have a wedge bottom. Reversed up, reversed up, reversed up. It's nested. There's a smaller wedge here. Up, up, up. Reasonable to get out of shorts. And bulls will look to buy for a reversal up. I think the next few charts are important. I want you to pay pretty close attention to them. We sold off and rallied. It created a tail on the bottom of the bar. We rallied a little bit on the open and sold off. Created a tail on the top of the bar. This is a five minute chart. And this is a daily chart. 90% of the time, if you have a bull day on the daily chart, this tail is caused by an early sell off and a reversal up. And the top tail is usually caused by some late profit taking, end of the day. Here's the open of the day, low of the day. And this tail on the bottom of the bull day was caused by this early sell off. There's the close. This tail on top was caused by this late sell off. Only 10% of the time when you have a bull day like this is the tail caused by a late sell off. Here's the open of the day. And here's the low of the day. It occurred late in the day. And that's only 10% of the time. 90% of the time during a bull trend day on the daily chart, you'll have an early sell off and an early reversal up. Trading range day. Here's the open. There's the low. Here's the open. Here's the high. Here's the close. That's the top of this white box. When you look at this bar on the daily chart, you don't know that the bottom tail was formed early in the day and the top tail came after the bottom tail. But you know that one of the tails was probably formed early in the day. You can say, well, Al, it's a bull body. Doesn't that mean that the day sold off and then rallied? No, not at all. In fact, that's not what happened here. We sold off, rallied, and then sold off again. Here's a bear day. 90% of the time that tail is caused by a small rally early in the day that reversed down. And 90% of the day, bear day here, that little tail on the bottom is caused by a little reversal up at the end of the day. We reversed up and sold off, but closed above the open. 10% of the time when you have a bear day like this, that tail on top, instead of coming early, comes later in the day. We had a high late in the day, late in the session, and then a reversal down late in the day, and that big tail came late in the day. We're going to talk a little bit about very common patterns that traders see on the open. The three most common patterns. Here we have a trend from the open bull trend. It begins with the very first bar. Sometimes it begins with the second or third bar. We have a gap up here, and on the third bar we began a trend from the open bear trend. It's also a double top, lower high, major trend reversal. Full trend, bear breakout, and a lower high major trend reversal. That's also a double top bear flag. Now, you can get a trend from the open. Here we got it up, here we got it down. You can also have a breakout mode open. In other words, an early trading range, and then a breakout. A standard breakout mode pattern means there's a new low of the day that reverses up, a new high of the day that reverses down. Theoretically, traders will buy a breakout above the top and sell a breakout below the bottom. Here we got a breakout above the top, and the market continued up for the rest of the day. This pullback never fell below the low of the day. Higher low major trend reversal. That's assuming there was a bear trend before this. If not, you can simply call it a deep pullback from the spool breakout above the early trading range. Breakout mode. After the first bar, there's a reversal down and a reversal up. Usually for breakout mode, I want the pattern to last at least 10 bars. So for me, it would be a reversal up and then a reversal down here. And traders would sell below the low or buy above the high. You can also call this a double top. Whenever there's a trading range, there's always going to be a double top and a double bottom. The third type of pattern is an opening reversal. You can get a trend from the open up or down. You can get an early trading range with a breakout up or down. Or you can get an opening reversal where the market goes one way and then reverses and goes the other way. We have a gap up above the moving average and then a pullback to the moving average. The bears were hoping for a trend from the open bear trend like this. Instead, we reversed up on the open an hour into the day, maybe a little bit more. And this is an opening reversal, a wedge bull flag. It led for a little swing up for the next several hours. Here's the moving average. We gap down below the moving average and we got a double top bear flag, an opening reversal down from below the moving average. Here, an opening reversal up. Here, an opening reversal down. You can call it a low two. You can call it a small double top. Here's the moving average. We gap down. This is a high one buy, a failed breakout below the moving average. We don't see what yesterday looked like, but this might also be a reversal up from below yesterday's low. This is hard to see. The second bar traded below the first bar. That's a low one. And then the fourth bar traded below the third bar. That's a low two. A micro double top and a low two and then a bear trend. I'm mentioning this because some traders like to count bars and count reversals and count pullbacks. Micro double top. The market went up and down on the first bar, up on the second bar and down on the third bar. Micro double bottom. We went above the first bar. We sold off and then we went above the third bar. So, a small double bottom with the low of the first bar and the low of the third bar. A lot of traders will buy that as a second entry buy. Another double bottom here and another double bottom here. Traders will look to buy reversals up from a double bottom. We don't know what the bars to the left look like here, but if it was a bear trend, this would be a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. And a reasonable buy for a swing up. If you want, you can also call it a triangle. We have a higher low here compared to this. We have a slightly lower high here, maybe a double top. Doesn't matter what you call it. It's a three legged move, a very tight range. It's breakout mode. Whether you call it a triangle or simply a tight trading range. Below the moving average, we have a double top. Below the moving average. So low one, low two. Micro double top, you can call this low one. And below there, low two. Every double top is a low two. And this one, the second high, subdivided into a smaller low one, low two. A third little reversal down, if you want, you can call it a triangle. Every low three, you can think of as a triangle or a wedge. A bigger triangle. Low or high. High or low. Does not matter that this high is above that high. It's still basically a triangle. Breakout mode. First reversal up, high one. Second one, high two. Third one, high three. All three failed. So a failed wedge bottom. The breakout below the wedge bottom failed. And the market reversed up. That happens 50% of the time. If you have a wedge bottom and a bear breakout. 50% of the time, the bear breakout will fail. If a trader was long, looking for an early low of the day. He would exit probably below the low of the wedge. And then consider buying again if the bear breakout failed. Wedge rally. One, pull back two, pull back three. So a low three short. In a bear trend, we're below the moving average. Reasonable short. I want to say a few things about stop and limit orders here. I talk more about it in the videos on scalping. We have trading ranges here and here. But they're different. This one is broad. Has micro channels. A series of bars here. Four bars without a pullback. And then another series of six bars here without a pullback. And then here, we have four bars down without a pullback. A lot of the bodies are big. Not much overlap between the bars. When a market looks like this, you can trade with both stops and limit orders. Traders like to buy low with stops betting on a low. Traders like to buy low with stops betting on a swing up. They'll also buy with limit orders. For example, when a bar is closing strong, they'll buy just before the bar closes or just after the bar closes and get filled on the next bar. If they see a sell off down to a support like a prior low and then there's a bad sell signal bar like a bar with a bull body or a doji, chances are there'll be buyers below the bar. So they'll place a limit order to buy at that low and get filled on the next bar. Same here. Three consecutive bull bars closing at or near their highs. Chances are a reversal down will fail and the bulls will get at least one more leg up. They'll place a limit order to buy at the low of the bar, betting against a reversal down and betting that the bears will get trapped and will get at least one more leg up. Opposite is true for the bears. The second entry short, first below this, second below that. We have two legs up, one pullback two, a big bar, possibly a climactic end of the move. They'll sell and the reversal down. Here we have a double top bear flag. Even with the bull bar, they'll sell looking for a second leg down after a bi-climax. One pullback two and the first leg down subdivided. Here, a low two bear flag. Low one, low two, bear bar at the moving average. They'll sell with a stop order, betting that this is now a bear swing, maybe a bear trend. Limit orders. Strong reversal. They'll sell the close looking for at least a little bit more down. Three consecutive bear bars after a bi-climax. They expect at least a small second leg down, maybe a big second leg down. They'll sell above the bull reversal here. Here we have a high two buy, but a tight channel. Only one bull bar in the past seven bars. And a bear body here. They'll sell with a limit order there. Strong bear breakout. Follow through. They'll sell closes of the strong bear breakout or the follow through bar. And then here, we have a good sell signal bar for a low two and then a good reversal bar, reversing this rally. Closing on its low. They'll look for maybe a breakout and a measured move down. They will sell the close. When you're selling the close, selling at the market, it's the same as selling at the limit order. Some traders simply hit sell the market. Other traders will place a limit order as the market is closing to sell at a certain price where they think the close will be. Or they'll place a limit order as soon as the bar closes to sell at the close of this bar. And then they get filled on the open of this bar. If this bar trades above that close, which is where their limit order is. Compare this with what you see here. Here, tails are prominent. Reverses are coming every one or two or three bars. And there is a lot of overlap. The market spends a lot of time in small, tight trading ranges. And the entire chart is in a tight trading range. If you're an extreme scalper, which very few people are, you're capable of making very quick decisions. You can enter with limit orders, buying below bars here, buying below bars here, scaling in using wide stops and scalping, and doing the opposite above bars. You sell above bars. You sell more higher. You sell above bad bull flags. Betting on reversals instead of on breakouts. In other words, you're betting that every attempt to become a trend will fail and the trading range will continue. You sell at prior highs. You sell above bad looking buy setups. Buying above a bear bar like that after a tight trading range like this, probably sellers above. Here we have a pair of bear bars. You'll sell. You'll sell more higher. You'll buy with limit orders. You'll buy below bars. Big bar with a tail. You'll buy strong bear closes in the bottom half of the developing range. Betting that you'll get a reversal instead of the start of a bear trend. You'll buy new lows. You'll scale in lower. The bulls, they will scale in higher. The bears who are selling, if they sell here and it does not go down immediately, they'll sell more higher. When the market has trending type behavior like this, you can patiently wait for a pattern and for a good signal bar before entering with the stock. We have a micro double bottom, down, down again at a prior low. Probable trading range, big up, big down, means big confusion. Usually means the trading range. Therefore, traders will look to buy low, sell high and take quick profits. Scalp. If a leg down is strong, a lot of traders will wait for a micro double bottom or a second entry buy, especially above a good buy signal bar. And the opposite is true at the top. Traders will look to sell on a reversal down from a prior high, especially after two legs up, one pull back two. And especially if there is a buy climax, an unusually big bull bar, for example. This is the biggest bull bar in about 20 bars. About 10% of the days look like this all day. So a couple of days a month, the market's in a tight trading range all day. And there are very few good stop entry buys or sells. Stop entry traders simply wait for the rare opportunity to sell with a stop on a reversal down from the top or on a reversal up from the bottom. Here there's no great looking stop entry buy. And they also wait to see if there's a strong breakout. Maybe the tight trading range will become a strong trend and then they can start trading with stop entries again. For example, buying pullbacks if there's a strong bull breakout and selling pullbacks from a strong bear breakout. When there are no good stop entries, traders will often buy on the close of consecutive bull bars, betting that the market will have at least a small second leg up. And that's true here as well. Two big bull bars closing on their highs, not much overlap. Two big bull bars closing on their highs, not much overlap. Odds are the bulls will get at least a small second leg up. If they take the buy and they're disappointed by the follow through, here a doji and then another doji, another doji, they'll be getting out. Most of the bulls were getting out here or here and the ones who did not gave up here. This is a pair of give up bars and it represents the bulls giving up. Here we have a pair of consecutive bear bars. This bar breaking below the low of the range has a fairly prominent tail, not good for the bears. Closed below the range, which is good. But look at the next bar. There's no follow through. The market immediately reverses. Much more common in a trading range than in a trend. Some bulls will buy the close of the bear breakout bar, betting on a continuation of the tight trading range instead of the start of a bear trend. Here's the average price. This is a big gap down from yesterday's close. And the market's reversing up on the second bar. The bull bar closing on its high. A lot of bulls will buy on a stop just above that high and get filled here above the high of that bar. Now we have a strong rally, but it's stalling right below the moving average. And we have a second reversal down. Traders will recognize this as a potential opening reversal and possible high of the day. Because this rally is strong, many traders will not take the first entry. However, they will take the second entry below this bar and get filled here. Now we have a double bottom. This low is slightly below that low. We broke below yesterday's low and we're getting a double bottom reversal up. And then we have a micro double bottom as well. Down and then a bull bar up. Another bear bar down and going up again. And this bull bar closing on or near its high. A reasonable buy. An IOI as well. Outside bar, which means this is an inside bar compared to this bar. And then another inside bar. IOI. Inside, outside, inside. Reasonable buy setup at the bottom of possibly a trading range. Possibly the low of the day. We have a parabolic wedge. We have a tight bull channel with three pushes up. One pullback. Two. Pullback. Three. And a bear bar closing below its midpoint. Possible failed breakout here. We have big up, big down. And now big up again. A lot of confusion usually means the trading range. Double top, lower high. Bear flag. We're starting to reverse down. And we're pulling back to a double top. Might break below the neckline and fall for a measured move. Wedge bear flag. We rallied on this bar. It's only a doji, but it did go down and up. And then we went down again to a new low. And we rallied a second time. And now a third time. And we're failing at the moving average. With the bear bar closing on its low. About a 50% pullback of this sell-off. A reasonable wedge bear flag. Wedge bear flag. We have a double bottom and a breakout. Whenever there's a double bottom and a breakout, you have three pushes down. We went down, we went up. We went down, we went up. We went down, we went up. We're going down. Traders will look for it to reverse up. I know it doesn't look like a wedge, but it functions like a wedge. And computers will trade it like a wedge. Consecutive strong bull bars closing on or near their highs after a wedge bottom. And then a higher low after the wedge bottom. Reasonable to buy. Betting that the day might become a trend day. Even though we're in a tight trading range here. Lots of reversals, lots of slowdowns. We're going down. We're going down. We're going down. We're going down. We're going down. We're going down. Traders will look for it to reverse up. I know it doesn't look like a wedge, but it functions like a wedge. And computers will trade it like a wedge. The only thing that we're going to do is surprise enough from a wedge. Like a wedge. There's a reagent range here. Lots of reversals. Lots of sideways bars. Most important rule. Be prepared for anything. And do not be surprised by anything. The open often has big moves that immediately reverse. They might seem too big and irrational for beginners to trade, but you have to remember what the market is doing. It's trying to find out what it should do. Should it trend up? Should it trend down? It often has to test up or down, sometimes once or twice, sometimes three times before traders become confident of the direction. Very common to see a double bottom and a double top on the open, and then the market decides whether to have a trend up or a trend down. As a trader, you're not really going to care if the market is going up or down. You buy because you might be buying the low of the day, and the market could rally a long way, going above all resistance. And the opposite is true near the top. They'll sell, taking a chance that this is going to be the high of the day. It was not. There's another opportunity to sell, betting that we've begun a swing down. And if it does trend, it could fall below all support and go a long way. Sometimes you have to take multiple entries as a swing trader before you get a good swing. This went up probably far enough for a small swing trade. And then from this reversal down, it swung down for about 30 bars. If this was a five-minute chart, that would represent over two hours of selling. It's really important never to have an opinion about what the market should do or what it cannot do. Because on the open, you often will see very strong legs up that immediately reverse. In fact, anytime on the open, you see a very strong move up or down, you have to assume that there's a 50% chance it's going to reverse. And that is true. That is absolutely true. You simply have to trade what's in front of you. And do not worry about understanding why it's doing it. Don't turn on the news to find out why the market's going up or why the market's going down. It's simply deciding on the direction of the day or the direction of the next couple of hours. A lot of times, the initial direction is wrong. And then the next direction is wrong. And the next direction is wrong. Sometimes it takes a while for it to decide on the direction of the first swing. And on some days, it never really has much of a swing at all. Why trade the open? Because it has the highest probability of having a swing trade. The highest probability of making money. I talked a little bit about common patterns that traders see. About 10% of the time, the day will have a trend from the open bull trend or a trend from the open bear trend. And then the day often has some kind of a trading range early in the day. That often sets up a breakout mode pattern where there is a reversal up from a new low, reversal down from a new high. Either can occur first. And then traders look for a breakout of that opening range. And then traders also look for double bottoms, double tops, wedge bottoms, and wedge tops on the open. For most traders, they should be entering with stop orders all the time. As you gain experience, you can enter with market orders and limit orders. Most important rule is you have to be prepared for anything. 50% of the time, any strong move up or down on the open will reverse. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of six videos on trading the open. благодарю for all your LinkedIn models and Xbox N910 onlaughing olurs now. We have to have to be able to support your Latin travel시는 aahmatical path to two ways of reducing and generalizing changes... Those advantages trying to take advantage of yours are most important to mi golfers, these examples they should be in of course. Also, use the point of wave cooperation. Thank you, Mr. Craigle here is what we have. It's important for us. There are many renovations to envoy sellers on Internationalこう on networking shells, or share your website, targets on wiring revenues.