 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching The Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability. I want to start by talking about the importance of a 50% pullback. Also, the math for a trade can improve after there is a breakout. We have a bull trend, decent breakout, and then a pullback. Because there's a strong bull trend, if there's a 50% pullback, there's the low of the bull trend, there's the high of the bull trend, here's a 50% pullback. There's a 60% chance of at least testing the high before hitting a stop if a person were to buy that 50% pullback. A bull trend means it's more likely that the market will continue higher. Obviously, if it reverses all the way to just above the bottom of the bull trend, the probability that it will get back to the top is small. But as long as it's pulling back to about 50%, there's a 60% chance that it will get here to the top of the bull trend before it gets here to the bottom of the bull trend or just a little bit below and hit a protective stop. Many bulls will place a limit order to buy a 50% pullback. Most would not get filled here. It usually has to fall below the limit order to get filled. And they would get filled on this bear bar. Other bulls prefer to buy on a reversal up from a 50% pullback. Here we have about an 8 bar bear micro channel. A lot of bulls would wait for a second entry buy. And here they have a bull body. They would buy on the reversal up above that bull body. A micro double bottom, a second entry, here's the first entry there. These buys have a 60% chance of leading to a rally up to here before a sell off down to here because what preceded this sell off was a bull trend. Buying here, it's halfway to the target and halfway to the stop. It's a little bit further to the stop because the stop is just below the bottom of the bull trend. The reward up to the high is equal to the risk down to the stop. Maybe a little bit more to the stop. Strong momentum up. So the probability is that the market is going to go up here before it'll come down here. And because of that, bulls buy at a 50% pullback. The reward is equal to the risk, but the probability is 60% or higher. That is the basis for traders buying 50% pullbacks from strong trends. The bulls got a breakout and is a double top. It broke below the neckline of the double top and a very strong sell off. Five consecutive bear bars, this one being very big, closing far below the low of the past 50 or 60 bars. The odds are traders will sell a 50% pullback. Bears who are short for any reason, selling down here, selling a 50% pullback. It doesn't matter. Their stop is above the top of the bear trend up here. The minimum target for the bears, whether they sell the close, sell the 50% pullback or sell below the reversal bar, down and get filled here, is down here. A new low in the bear trend. The risk to the stop is about the same as the reward to the target, the new low. Yet, because the sell off was so strong, there's probably a 60% chance that the market is going to fall here before it's going to go there. Risk is equal to reward, but probability is maybe 60%. Therefore, selling a 50% pullback in a strong bear trend is a very good thing to do, a very good traders equation. Often when you get a 50% pullback, the momentum up is so strong that you think that the market is reversing into a bull trend. However, as long as it does not get much above that 50% pullback, chances are this is a bull trap. Trapping inexperienced bulls into buying too high when the market is still in a bear trend and this is simply a pullback. Two legs up, one pullback, two. Look at the bad follow through after the strong bull bar and the tail on the top of the bull bar. This is simply a test of this breakout point and a test of the 50% pullback. Chances are the market is going lower even though there's a strong bull bar. Bears are short here. The distance to their target, their reward, is the same as the distance to their stop, their risk. But the probability of making the reward is maybe 60%. Even though the risk is equal to the reward, the probability makes this a very favorable trade. A very positive trader's equation. We have a strong sell-off. Maybe about a 10 or 15 bar bear micro channel. No bull bars in about 10 or 15 bars. Traders will sell a 50% pullback. Some will place a limit order at 50%. This is 50%. They'll sell with the limit order. Others will sell on a reversal down. When you have a strong bear trend and a pullback to about 50%, there's a 60% chance the market is going to test the bear low before there's a rally up to the top of the bear trend. In this particular case, the stop is one tick above the top of the bear leg. And that's 4.75 points above. And the reward is 4.5 points below. This is a positive trader's equation. Reward equal to risk. Actually, the risk is one tick bigger because the stop is one tick above the top of the bear leg. And the probability is 60%. Stop above the top of the bear leg. Some traders will simply place a limit order to sell a 50% pullback and put a stop above the top of the bear leg. Others will sell a reversal down or a second entry short or a third or fourth entry short looking for a test of the bear low. Since the probability is 60% that the market will get here before it gets here. Since it's a bear trend, there's a 60% chance of making 10 ticks before losing 10 ticks, 20 ticks or 30 ticks before losing 20 or 30 ticks, and a move down to the bear low before moving the same distance up to the bear high. The trader's equation is positive. In general, when you have a high probability trade, the risk reward ratio is bad. In other words, the risk reward ratio is maybe one to one. That means that the reward is usually not bigger than the risk or not much bigger than the risk. It usually means either a big risk or a small reward or both or reward equal to risk not much bigger than risk. Even if you sell this for a scalp, you have a positive trades equation. Let's say you're looking to scalp for one or two points and use a stop of one or two points. Chances are if you enter at a 50% pullback, any number of ticks down, let's say seven ticks down, you'll get there before it goes seven ticks up. 15 ticks down before it goes 15 ticks up. In general, it's better to take this as a swing trade, looking for a test of this low and putting your stop up here. That is the most reasonable stop, the top of the bear trend. This is the euro versus the dollar, a five minute chart. And there's a strong reversal, strong bull breakout, three consecutive bull bars. A lot of traders will place a limit order to buy at a 50% pullback or on a reversal up. Because the trend is strong, if you buy a 50% pullback, there's a 60% chance that the market will get to the top of the bull trend and test the bull trend. And test the bull high before it falls below the bottom of the bull trend and hits a stop just below that low. In this particular case, it's 32 pips to this high and 32 pips to that low. The stop is one pip below. There's a 60% chance approximately of reaching that high and making 32 pips before it hits a stop below this low, 33 pips below. Even though the reward is equal to the risk and is not twice the risk, the 60% probability of success makes the trader's equation positive. And therefore, mathematically, it's a good trade. The stop is just below the bottom of the bull leg. Bulls will either buy with a limit order at a 50% pullback or on the reversal up. Very often when you get a 50% pullback in a reasonably strong bull trend, the sell-off is so strong, it looks like the bull trend is failing and it's reversing. However, the odds are that if you take the 50% buy, you're going to make money even if the reversal down is strong. Reasonably strong bull reversal. 60% probability that you make 32 pips before your stop is hit 33 pips below. In fact, you could make much more than 32 pips. In this particular case, the trader would have made much more before losing 32 pips. Therefore, the reward is much better than simply one to one. Swing bulls will buy this 50% pullback, put a stop down here, and it'll just hold until their premise is no longer valid. Maybe they'll get out here, maybe they'll get out here. And if they do, their reward is much bigger than their risk. That's an even stronger trader's equation. Here we have a bull leg. It's 52 pips tall. And we have a pullback that's 28 pips down from the high. Strong enough bull breakout probably will test that high. Buying with a limit order at a 50% pullback, a trader has a 60% chance of testing the high, making 26 pips, before the market goes down and hits the stop. One pip below the low, 27 pips. Therefore, a bull buying here has a 60% chance of making 26 pips before losing 27 pips. That is a positive trader's equation, and therefore, mathematically, it makes sense to take the trade. Stop is below the bottom of the bull leg. Some traders place the limit order to buy at 50%. Other traders buy at reversal up. Here we have a high 2 buy, high 1, and then a second entry, high 2. Whenever you have a 60% probability, you have a high probability trade. That means that you have bad risk reward. Bad risk reward means that you have a reward that's small relative to the risk, or a big risk. In general, any time the reward is less than 2 times the risk, I call it a bad risk reward ratio. But I often take trades where the risk reward ratio is 1 to 1. The reward equals the risk, if the probability is 60% or higher. Even a scalp has a positive trader's equation. For example, if you buy this and place a stop 10 pips down looking to take a 10 pips profit, chances are 60% that you'll make money. What about buying this and putting a stop 13 pips down looking to make 13 pips? We're in a bull trend. Chances are you'll make a reward equal to your risk, as long as your risk is no more than this stop below the bottom of the bull leg. It doesn't matter if it's 5 pips, 10 pips, 15 pips for the risk, and 5, 10, or 15 pips for the reward. 60% chance you'll make your reward before your stop is hit. Many traders like to enter early because the risk is less and the reward is greater. Other traders prefer to enter after a strong breakout, when the probability is higher. The math can actually be better after a strong breakout. Here we have a trading range, and the bulls are trying to get trend resumption. Bull trend, trading range, bull breakout. Three bull bars here, a bull bar here, closing above the top of the past 50 bar trading range. The context is good for trend resumption up. The market's in breakout mode. We have three bull bars here, and now we have a pretty good sized bull bar. 60% probability, maybe even more, that our trader buying that close will make a reward equal to or greater than the risk. He would put a stop either below that low or below this low. His 60% chance he'll make his profit before his stop gets hit. So, let's say a trader buys the close of that bull breakout bar. He can put a stop one tick below the bottom of the bull breakout bar. The market usually will not fall below the bull bar if it's going higher. Sometimes it will pull back below that bull bar and continue up. Most of the time, if it's going higher, it will not fall below the low of that breakout bar. In this particular case, if you buy that close, and you put your stop below, your stop is eight ticks below your entry. Since you're risking eight ticks below the bottom of the bull bar, your minimum reward should be eight ticks above. And the breakout is strong enough so that there's a 60% chance if you buy that close, you'll hit this profit target before you hit that stop. Therefore, the trader's equation is good. Let's say you chose not to exit and instead looked at this as a swing trade. This is where you would have exited. This was your eight ticks profit target. But let's say instead you held long. As the size of the breakout grows, so does the size of the target. For example, let's say you bought the close of this bar. Now your stop is still here, but your target is a measured move based from that close to this low. And your target is now here. Some bulls keep buying closes. The stop is still down here. But since this is a reasonable breakout entry, chances are 60%, the market will go for a measured move up before it hits the stop below the bottom of the bull breakout. If you buy that close, your stop is still here. But now you have a 60% chance of making a 14 tick profit. Your stop is now 14 ticks below that close. So 60% chance if you buy this close, you're going to get there and make 14 ticks before it hits your stop down here. The bulls who bought this close and held, and now the market is here. They have a 60% chance of making 14 ticks above this close, which is 20 ticks above their original close, while risking only eight ticks. They bought that close. Their stop is still eight ticks below their entry price. But now that we have this close, the market has a 60% chance of getting here. So these bulls have a 60% chance of making 20 ticks before an eight tick stop is hit. So excellent traders equation at this point. The math is getting better as the breakout continues. We have another bar in the breakout. Some bulls will buy that close, stop down here. The breakout is strong. 60% chance the market will go. A measured move up from this close to that stop before it gets to that stop. The stop for these bulls is 23 ticks below the low of the bull breakout. And therefore they have a 60% chance of the market going 23 ticks higher before it goes 23 ticks down. Very good traders equation for buying that close. They buy that close and their new target is 23 ticks above. 60% chance it will get here before it hits their stop down here. What about the bulls who bought this close? Well, their stop is still eight ticks below their entry. But now their target is 38 ticks above their entry. So they have a 60% chance at this point that they'll make 38 ticks while risking only eight ticks. They bought this close and as the breakout continues, their reward gets much, much better, but their risk stays the same. And the probability stays the same. Once we're at this close, 60% chance measured move up. Once we're at this close, 60% chance measured move up. The risk stays the same. The probability stays at 60%, but the reward grows. As the breakout continues, the math gets better and better for the bulls who bought that first close. The bulls who bought here, their minimum target is here, equidistant to their stop. 23 ticks, they could get out right here and have a positive traders equation. Reward equal to risk. The probability, when you buy here, 60% that you'll get to your target before the market hits your stop. You can see the tail above the pink line. That means there was some profit taking from the bulls who bought that close. The bulls who bought this close never had more than an eight tick risk. Their risk was always to just below the bottom of the bull breakout. No matter how big the breakout went, that's where their stop was. Once you have a major higher low, a reasonably strong breakout to a new high, they might raise their stop. But certainly their initial risk was only eight ticks, yet their reward was way up here. Once we had this close, they had a 60% chance of making 38 pips. And you can see some traders took profits here. That's what caused that tail. This is a 60 minute chart of the dollar versus the Canadian dollar. We're in a bear trend, a very tight bear channel, very few bull bars and they're all small. Now we're getting a bear breakout, a big bear bar, close below the low of the past 50 or 60 bars. Probability is we're going to go lower, at least to a reward as big as the risk. Strong breakout, good contacts. That means high probability, 60% or more, that traders selling this close will make a reward equal to their risk. Even a scalper going for a small reward has a 60% probability of making a reward equal to his risk. For example, if he's scalping for 12 ticks while risking 11 ticks, 15 ticks while risking 15 ticks. 60% chance he'll reach his target before his stop is hit. That's the minimum goal. Most traders should still swing trade and try to get a reward at least two times their risk. A trader could sell this close, maybe put a stop just above the top of the bear leg, or stop above the top of the bear breakout. If this is going to be a successful swing down, it should not get to the top of this bear bar. If you sell that close and your stop is here, just above the high of the bar, you're risking 19 pips. Because the breakout is strong and the context is good, 60% chance it'll fall 19 pips from your entry before it rallies 19 pips to your stop. Sell that close, stop up here. 60% chance we're going to fall to this level. A target equal to the risk. Tight channel, a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Some traders instead will sell this close. Their stop is still above the top of the bear breakout. Their risk is greater, but there's still a 60% chance the market will fall for a measured move. Therefore, their profit is greater as well. A sell the close bear trend. So bears keep selling closes. They don't sell every close. Some will sell this close. Others sell this close. Others sell this close. Others sell this close. No matter which close you sell, 60% chance the market will fall for a measured move from your entry to the stop. The stop is still one pip above the top of that bear breakout, even if you sell here. But the bears are sold here are now risking 34 pips. They have a 60% chance that the market will fall 34 pips before it hits that stop. Here's the minimum target. The bears are sold here. They're still only risking to this line, which is 19 pips. These bears are risking 19 pips. Since there's a 60% chance at this point that we're going to fall here, the bears are sold here. Now we have a 60% chance of making 49 pips while risking only 19 pips. As the breakout continues, the math for these bears gets better and better and better. Their risk stays the same, but their reward continues to grow as the breakout grows. These bears should not be too quick to take profits because their target keeps getting further and further away. Their reward continues to grow as the breakout grows. It's still a sell the close bear trend, a bear micro channel, no pullbacks since over here. Reasonably strong breakout. Some bears will sell that close, and their stop is above the top of the bear sell climax, which is one pip above this bear bar. Their stop is 59 pips above their entry. They sell here, stop here. They're looking for a measured move down, 59 pips below. And because the breakout is strong and the context is good, they have a 60% chance of the market falling 59 pips down to here before it rallies 59 pips up there. The bears are sold here. The bears are sold here. The bears are sold here. Their stop is still only 19 pips. But once the market is here, there's a 60% chance of it falling here. These bears now are risking 19 pips and have a 60% chance of making 99 pips. As the breakout continues to grow, their probability stays 60% that they'll make a measured move based upon the current close to the stop. And their risk is still here. So the risk stays the same. The probability stays the same. But as the breakout grows, the reward gets bigger. And therefore selling here and holding as the breakout continues, you improve your trader's equation. The math gets better. Strong reversal up at the measured move target based upon the last close of the sell the close bear trend. That tells you that a lot of traders took partial profits, maybe full profits, and a measured move down from that close to where the stop is. You can see when the market got there, there was a lot of buying. And a lot of that buying is bears taking profits. And some of it is from bulls knowing the bears will take profits. So the bulls buy for a scalp. The bears who took the first short and held never had more than 19 pips risk. Their stop was above the high of that initial big bear breakout. When they initially sold, they had a 60% chance of making 19 pips before a stop was hit. At this point, they had a 60% chance of making 99 pips before their stop was hit. I began by talking about the importance of a 50% pullback and a strong trend. If you're in a strong trend and you have a 50% pullback, chances are 60% or higher, the trend will resume and test the extreme of the trend. For example, in a bull trend, it will test the high before it hits the stop below the low. If you're entering in a strong breakout and you hold as the breakout continues to grow, your math actually improves. Your probability stays at 60% of a measured move profit. Your risk remains the same. But as the breakout grows, the measured move target grows. And that means the reward grows as well. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability.