 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on climaxes. In this video, I'll be talking about what I mean by climax. Every trend bar is a breakout and a climax. If a breakout occurs early in a trend, I refer to it as a breakout. If it occurs after a trend has extended for 20 or more bars, then I start referring to it as a possible climax. All major reversal patterns involve trading ranges most of the time, and that includes climaxes as well. For example, a climax is often a breakout from a final flag. Also, whenever there is a climactic reversal, there eventually is a pullback, and that pullback is a small trading range. Every trend bar, and every series of trend bars, is a breakout and a climax. I use the term climax to refer to a breakout that occurs late in a trend, and is followed by an end of the trend, either by the market going sideways or going in the opposite direction. A climactic move is often an acceleration of the move. For example, we're going down with lower lows here and lower highs, and then we have an acceleration down. We have a breakout and a turnout that was the end of the trend. Likewise, the market's going up here, and we're accelerating up again here and again here. This is a bi-climax, this is a bi-climax, this is a bi-climax, bi-climax, bi-climax. The series of four bars is a bi-climax. Another bi-climax, another bi-climax. A ten-bar bold microchannel, that's a breakout and therefore a bi-climax as well. I don't use the word climax to refer to a breakout until the bars after the breakout show that the trend has ended. Either reversed or halted became a trading range. Most climaxes lead to a three to five or ten bar trading range, and then the market decides whether it will reverse or resume. Here we have a bi-climax and a pause, and the trend resumed. Here we have a sell climax and a pause, and the trend reversed. In general, whenever there's a climax, 50% chance of a trend reversal, 50% chance of trend resumption. We got a trend reversal here, and we had a bi-climax and an attempt at a reversal, but it led to trend resumption here. 50% of the time when you have a climax, here a sell climax, you get a reversal. 50% of the time when you have a climax, you get trend resumption. Breakouts usually fail, and therefore there's usually at least a little climax. Most climaxes are only a single bar and lead to a minor reversal. For example, a pullback in a trend or a leg in a trading range. Here we have a sell climax, and it led to a reversal. The reversal was a bi-climax, and that led to a reversal down. This reversal down is a sell climax, and it led to a reversal up. Every trend bar is a climax. Here's a bi-climax, a pause, and we continued up. Here's a bi-climax and a bear bar, a pause, and it led to a reversal down. Most of the reversals are minor. For example, here we have a bi-climax, and it led to a reversal down that became a higher low, a bull flag and a bull trend. Again, a sell climax, and it led to a bull flag and a resumption up. Here we have possibly an early bear trend, possibly a bull flag that could lead to a resumption up. And we have a bi-climax, and it led to just a pause, a bear flag and trend resumption down. Even when there is a successful breakout, it still usually results in only a minor leg in a trend or a trading range. Here we have a successful breakout, strong breakout, follow through bar, and it only led to what became a trading range. Big down, big up, big confusion, trading range, and then breakout mode, either for a reversal or resumption down. Now, by climax, the bulls are becoming aggressive. Instead of bears selling at the high, the bears are getting overwhelmed by bulls willing to buy at the high. That's a sign of strong bulls. That trend bar is a sign of the bears giving up, too many bears buying back shorts, too many bulls buying aggressively. aggressively, and the same right here as well. There are always bears selling at the prior high, and this bull trend bar shows that those bears were trapped, and many of them quickly bought back their shorts. Bulls saw that as well, and they bought as well. However, whenever you get a big bar late in a trend like that, chances are it's going to lead to a climactic reversal and at least a trading range, and maybe an opposite trend. Cell climax, the bears were very aggressive briefly, but they were overwhelmed by the bulls right here, and this big bull bar after that bear bar is a combination of the bears giving up and the bulls buying. A climax can be as brief as a single bar. Here's a single bar cell climax. Here's a three bear bar cell climax. Climaxes can also last for many bars. For example, here's approximately a seven or eight bar bull micro channel. It would be a breakout on a higher time frame chart. On this time frame, it lasted about eight bars. And again, here, another bull micro channel by climax lasting many bars. Whenever there's a successful breakout, you often get a swing and a measuring gap, the start of a new trend. Most breakouts typically fail and represent a climactic end of a trend or a leg in a trend. And therefore, most climaxes end up being exhaustion gaps. We have a gap between the close of this bar and these lows, and also the close of this bar and these lows. We have another bar in the cell climax. So now the gap is between this close and all of those lows. We get a bull reversal here. The bears hope it's simply a pullback, testing the breakout. They want the bear trend to resume. At this point, at the close of this bar, the gap is from the high of this bar and that low, the first bar of the climax, this low, and any of these lows. All of those are gaps. And they all close with this big reversal up. And at that point, once all of those gaps close, you look at this bear breakout, a cell climax, and you call it an exhaustive cell climax. And all of those gaps are exhaustion gaps. We're starting to trend down. We have a four bar bear breakout. At this point, we don't know if it's going to be a measuring gap leading to a measured move down or if it'll fail the way this one failed, and the bull trend will resume up from a higher low. The bulls tried to resume up here, just like they did over here, and the bears turned it down again. And there's a gap, these highs and that low. This is a breakout test of the breakout point, and once it starts to turn down, especially with a couple of bear bars, the odds of it falling for a measured move go up. Initially, you're going to look at the most recent lower high for the measured move projection, this lower high to the gap. If it falls below this line, traders will then look for a measured move based upon the top of the bear trend to the middle of the gap. The measured move down would be here. We have a trading range and a bear breakout. A very strong bear breakout, but still a breakout, and most breakouts fail. And the gaps close, and then the breakout becomes an exhaustion gap. I would call this series of three bars an exhaustion gap. Once this bar went above that low, this low, this low, that low. All the gaps closed, and therefore, this is an exhaustion gap. I know there's no actual gap there, but it functions exactly like a gap. In this reversal up, closing the space or the potential gap means that it's an exhaustive end of the trend. That means that the market either goes sideways or it could reverse or after five or ten bars, it could resume down again. It simply means this breakout phase has ended. We have three consecutive bear bars and then a bull bar. At this point, the gap is from this close to any of these lows, or at the close of this bar, it's from the high of this bar to any of those lows as well. When you have a sell climax and you start to get a reversal, the target is the top of the sell climax. The market usually tries to go at least a tiny bit above that high. Sometimes it reverses down, usually it goes sideways at least a little bit. If it reverses down, the bears see this as a double top, this high and that high. They see this as the neckline. They look for the bear trend to resume, break below the neckline, and fall for a measured move down. The bulls look for the reversal down to fail, and they want a bull breakout above the double top and then a measured move up from the neckline to the double top. Whenever you have a climax that reverses, the first target is always the start of the climax. In a sell climax, it would be the high here. And a buy climax here, if it starts to reverse, the first target is the bottom of the buy climax here and then possibly all the way down there. Sometimes when you get that reversal, you get an opposite trend. Most of the time, the market goes sideways for 5 or 10 bars and then enters breakout mode for either a reversal or a resumption. Very strong bear breakout, late in a bear trend. Very strong bull breakout, late in a bull trend. This is the traditional definition of a climax, that you have a strong surge late in a trend, and then an abrupt, unexpected reversal. And unexpected means low probability reversal. When you see the bulls try to break to the upside here and fail, and the market reverses down strongly here and then has a second consecutive bear bar, this far closing below the lows of this 20 bar trading range, traders think at that instant, the odds are pretty good that we're going lower. The bulls tried to break out and failed, and now we have a bear breakout. It's unexpected that you'd get another reversal. And therefore, this is an unexpected event, a sell climax that led to a reversal. That's the traditional definition of a climax. Here it went down and went up. That would be a B bottom. When you get an abrupt reversal at the top, a bi-climax, traders expecting a measuring gap. The close of this bar and these highs, maybe a measured move up. We're starting to pull back. The bulls were hoping that this would pull back for only a bar or two, and then resume up and form a gap, maybe from the low of this bar to the high of these breakout points, and then a measured move up. First leg up, and then gap, and then measured move up. Once you get three or four consecutive bear bars closing on their lows like this, chances are the market's going lower, and the market's going to close the gaps. At this point, the gap is this low and this high, and this low and these highs as well. They're all breakout points. And typically, once it starts to reverse, it's going to fall below all of those breakout points. And usually, it tests at least a little bit below the bottom of the bi-climax. Climax, climactic reversal, two terms for the same thing. You get a climax and then a pause. And sometimes you get a reversal, sometimes you simply get a pause. Here we have a bi-climax and a pause. Instead of a reversal, we got trend resumption up. We have a second bi-climax here and a pause. And this time, we got a reversal. Down at the low here, we were selling off strongly and we reversed up. Instead of a pullback, there's no chance to exit without a loss if you're a bear who sold anywhere down here. And the opposite is true here. If you bought this close, confident that you were going to get a measured move up, you never got a chance to get out break even. You were disappointed by this bear bar. Maybe you tried to place a limit order to get out of your lungs to break even. It never came back and you ended up having to chase it down. If you want, you can call that an inverted V top or V top and this will be bottom. I always call it something else because it is always something else. Again, a climax can be a single trend bar like this or it could be two or more trend bars like this. It's an extreme acceleration in the move up or down. Here we tried to break strongly to the downside, yet we reverse up. Here we tried to break strongly to the upside and we reverse down. This is a bi-climax. It's a bull breakout, a bull reversal, but it's a strong bi-climax and it's unexpected. The odds are we'll get at least a second leg up. Here we have another breakout. It's probably strong enough to get more up, but once you see the bad follow through, the bear bar after the bull bar, the bear bar closing on its low, a lot of bulls will exit below that bar. A lot of bears will sell. Higher probability, wait until we get two or three consecutive bear bars closing on their lows and then sell closes. Any unsustainable move late in a trend is a climax. Once the trend lasts 20 or more bars, if anything is unsustainable, for example, a very tight channel, a micro channel, a very tight channel, it's probably climactic. However, even though this is climactic, it can last a long, long time. The bears tried to reverse it here with an acceleration upward and instead of a reversal down, we fell below the bottom of the bi-climax bar here, went sideways, and then we rallied again in a very tight bull channel. All of this is climactic. On a higher timeframe chart, it's a series of bull trend bars with no pullback. If the trend continues, this is all climactic. It's a bi-climax. The trend's continuing. I call it a breakout. If the trend pauses or reverses, then I say it's a climactic breakout or a climactic move, a failed breakout. It's a bi-climax. This is all a bi-climax and it's still a bi-climax. And then once it starts to do this, traders start to apply the term climactic end to the trend or a bi-climax. But the entire thing is a bi-climax. And this entire rally is a bi-climax. It just went on for a long, long time. Every trend bar is a breakout. Every trend bar is a climax. I talked about that earlier. All markets are constantly trying to break out. Most breakout attempts are brief and fail. For example, the bears tried to get a breakout here. Grief and failed. The bears tried to get a breakout here. They tried to get a bear breakout here below this full channel and it failed. When you get these little bear breakouts on a smaller timeframe chart, they can be dramatic. But on this timeframe, they're trivial. And a smaller timeframe chart, every one of these breakouts up and down can look very impressive. But on this timeframe, they're minor. Yet, we just kept getting climactic moves up and up and up and up. And then we started getting them both up and down here. And the market sideways balanced after 20 or more bars, the probability of a successful trend resumption up falls to the same as the probability of a trend reversal down. Here, we did get trend resumption up. Look at this segment on the five-minute chart. This is probably 30 or 40 bars in a very tight bull channel. A tight bull channel is always a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. And therefore, it's always a clear climax on a higher timeframe chart. For example, this green box is this. This is the 60-minute chart. It's three big bull trend bars. Here is the five-minute chart. And it's whatever, 36 consecutive bull bars in a very tight channel. Whenever I see that tight channel, I know on the 60-minute chart, it's going to be a strong breakout. Occurring late in the trend, it's a climax. Usually, eventually, it's going to lead to some pause, some halt to the buying. Not necessarily a reversal. I usually reserve the term climax for a breakup that occurs late in the trend, after 10 or 20 bars in the trend. But any trend bar or series of trend bars is a breakout and a climax. This is a bi-climax. This is a bi-climax. These three bars bi-climax. These two bars. These three bars bi-climax. Then sell climax. Sell climax. A three-bar sell climax. A two-bar sell climax. Or you can call it a four-bar sell climax. Here a five-bar bi-climax. Usually when I see a breakout early in a trend, this is a possible bull trend. I call it a breakout and not a climax. And I usually refer to a big breakout late in a trend as a climax. Here this would be a sell climax. It's the biggest bear bar. 20 or more bars into the bear trend. Chances are it's going to be an exhaustion gap. It's going to trade up above its high after a brief follow-through sell-off. A bull breakout late in a bull trend. A fairly strong bull breakout. I would call it a bi-climax. And I would be thinking that it might be an exhaustion gap. A gap between this close and this high, this high. And then once we start to reverse down, the gap now is this low and this high and that high. And at this point, I'm seeing a strong bull breakout late in a bull trend. And it's starting to reverse. At this point, I believe it's probably going to be an exhaustion gap. And that we'll get a pullback below all of the breakout points, including this low. And we'll probably test a little bit below the bottom of the bi-climax. And then decide whether to go sideways and resume up or continue down for at least a measured move down based upon the height of the bi-climax. When the market comes down to the bottom of that bi-climax, it often forms a double bottom with that low. Rallies. Often above this high. That would be the neckline of the double bottom. Bottom here. Bottom here. Break above that point. Neckline. Measured move up. On the other hand, if it breaks below the double bottom, which it did, then traders look for a measured move down. From the neckline to the double bottom, measured move down. We felt more than that. I know it never really bottomed here. And I know this is really not a bottom. It's a pause and a rally. But it's a potential double bottom. Whenever the market rallies in a bi-climax, it's low. It's often tested over here. And very often, it resumes up, forms a double bottom. Sometimes it only pauses briefly or not at all and continues down. Since there was the possibility of a double bottom here, I call it a double bottom. Even though there was no significant attempt of a double bottom in this case. Once we break low this low, I look at it as a failed double bottom. I'm looking for a measured move down. A bear breakout. And therefore, it's a sell climax. And it's the strongest bear bar, the biggest bear bar occurring late in the bear trend. Probably an exhaustion gap. The gap initially is this close and these lows, any of these lows. And then we have another bar. It's this close and that low. This close and any of these lows. All breakout points. Once we start to reverse here, and then we start to resume back down, the gap is this high and that low. It's possible it's a measuring gap and will fall for a measured move down. More likely, the biggest bear bar occurring 20 or more bars into a bear trend. It's an exhaustion gap and the gap will close. The gap between this low and that high. And an exhaustion gap, an exhaustive sell climax late in a bear trend. The market usually goes at least a little bit above the top of the sell climax. And then decides, does it go sideways and then resume down? Or does it reverse up for a measured move? When you get a breakout at the start of a trend or the potential start of a trend, I do not use the term climax. Instead I call it a breakout. I would call these three bear bars a bear breakout. And this a climax. A breakout late in a trend. I tend to call it a climax. It could be a measuring gap. A breakout late in a bear trend. Again, it could be a measuring gap. But I suspect the strongest breakout in a bear trend that's lasted 20 or more bars. It's more likely going to be an exhaustive sell climax. Here, a breakout. The start of a potential bull trend. Here, a breakout. The start of a potential bear trend. But it's also a climax. And it's also a series of trend bars. Just like this led to a reversal. It's a breakout. A failed breakout. And it's a series of trend bars. Every trend bar, every series of trend bars is a breakout. And it's also a climax. When it occurs late in a trend, it's more likely going to be a climactic end of the trend. When it occurs early in a potential trend, it's more likely going to be the start of a trend. Bull breakout. And then it reversed down. And once you get two or three or four bear bars, it's a bear breakout. A bear breakout below this very tight channel. A bull breakout. We have five consecutive bull bars closing on their highs. And initially, it's a break above this very tight bear channel. And then ultimately, it's a break above this channel. I'm always looking at support and resistance. Here we have a bull trend. And we have a buy climax. The biggest bull bar in the entire bull trend. A bull trend that lasted 60 or 70 bars. This is probably going to be an exhaustion gap. The gap between this close and this high. Once you get that bear bar, traders will start to sell. Bulls will sell out of their lungs below this bar. Bears will sell into shorts, expecting at least a test at the bottom of the bar. They certainly expect the gap to close. This is probably going to be an exhaustion gap. The biggest bull body occurring 20 or more bars into a bull trend. It's higher probability for the bears if there are other reasons to sell. For example, resistance. You can draw a trend channel across the top of this section of bars. And we have a bull breakout. 75% chance the breakout will fail and reverse down to the bottom of the channel. 25% chance it will continue up into an even stronger bull trend. We're getting the reversal here. That means the top of the channel is resistance. A prior high is resistance as well. We broke above it and then we reversed back below it. So we're failing at the prior high. Here's another prior high. We failed with the breakout above that high as well. We have a double bottom bull flag. We have a bull trend, a pullback, a new high, another attempt to reverse down. Maybe a wedge. One, two, three. And instead of breaking below this lower high, we're forming a double bottom and we're continuing up. We're breaking above the neckline of the double bottom. Traders have to be thinking about a potential measure move up. Once it gets there, the bulls take profits and bears start to short. That means that measured move target is resistance. I have a bigger list of what constitutes support and resistance in the video on support and resistance. The more reasons that there are resistance, the more likely this breakout will be an exhaustion gap. Rockets in a bull trend. And then a trading range. This is the top of the range. This is the bottom of the range. And we're getting a bull breakout. This is a bear channel, bull flag, bull breakout. But whenever you're getting a rally in a trading range, chances are it's going to fail. And the rally, no matter how strong, is simply a buy vacuum test of resistance at the top of the range. Here we have a very strong reversal down, but it's still in the range. And chances are it's going to be a sell vacuum test at the bottom of the range. Here the bears got follow through and they got a measure move down. Here's a series of strong bull bars. And then another pair of bull bars. Another big bull bar. Another pair of bull bars. And then a series of bull bars here. A series of consecutive buy climaxes usually leads to exhaustion and a trading range and sometimes an opposite trend. No more buyers. They're all exhausted and they'll wait five or ten or more bars before they'll think about buying again. They wait to see if the bears will be able to reverse the market or if the bears will be unable to get a strong reversal. You can see the bears got a breakout below a channel, but they could not get follow through. And the bulls see that and then the bulls started buying again and the bears gave up. We have a very strong rally up here, but it's in a trading range and more likely it's simply a buy vacuum test of the top of the range. And you'll get a reversal down into the range. Here we not only got a reversal down into the range, we got a trend reversal, a higher high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear break below the bull trend line, a trading range and then a higher high. The market is getting vacuumed up to the top of the range resistance. The bulls are trying to get the breakout above the range. More likely the bulls will take profits because in a trading range they're expecting that the breakouts will fail. And therefore they're going to be quick to take profits near the top of the range. The bears also expect the breakouts attempts to fail and they'll sell at prior highs. At this high, at this high, at this high, at this high, and this high, betting that the breakout will fail and it will come back below all of these highs. Whenever you get a strong sell off like this, that reverses up. It's usually a sell vacuum test of support, even if you don't see the support. Very strong sell off, another climax, another sell climax, another sell climax, and then a reversal. This is probably a sell vacuum test of support. For example, it's testing this prior low. Some traders would call only these three bars as the sell vacuum test of the prior low. I would call the entire sell off as simply a sell vacuum test of support in the bottom of a developing trading range. A pair of bear bars, a climax, bear bar, climax, bear bars, climax, climax, climax. When you get a sell off that comes in the form of three or four or more sell climaxes, usually the market will end up exhausted and it will go sideways for 10 bars or so, sometimes 30 or 40 bars as it did here. And then the market either reverses up or resumes down. When you have a lot of consecutive sell climaxes without much of a pullback, usually the market gets exhausted. No more sellers at this price. They'll wait to see a reversal. If the bulls are not particularly strong on their reversal, the bears will sell again. Here we have a single sell climax. And it's a second leg down. We have the first leg down. The bulls thought it was a bull flag after this breakout. They were expecting a bull breakout. Instead, we're getting a bear breakout below this bull flag. And it's a single sell climax. Usually when you get a single sell climax and the market finds support and tries to reverse up, it's simply a sell vacuum test of support. It's a sell vacuum test of this area here where the bulls bought earlier. Testing the prior low, a possible double bottom and possible trading range. Big up, big down, big confusion usually means trading range. Here's the final leg up in the bull trend. It's a climax. We have five consecutive bull bars, pretty strong looking bull bars. The market sold off to test the bottom of the buy climax. Instead of bouncing and maybe forming a double bottom breaking above this neckline for a measured move up, it broke strongly below the bottom. Remember I said earlier, whenever you have a buy climax, the market often comes down just a little bit below. And it can reverse up and view this as a double bottom. We do not have a bottom here, but it could have been. And we break above the neckline for a measured move up or we break below the bottom of the buy climax and fall for a measured move down, which we did here. The more reasons for support, the more likely this is simply a sell vacuum test of support and the market will reverse up. Weekly chart, daily chart. A buy climax, late in a bull trend. Consecutive buy climaxes, here, here, here, here. Once you get three or four consecutive buy climaxes, chances are you're going to get a pullback and a pause. Probably this is going to be an exhaustion gap. A gap between this close and these highs. And then we have a pause bar. The gap at this point is from this low or that low and these highs. Chances are the gap will close, will fall below the breakout point, and will fall below the bottom of the buy climax. The bulls are hoping for a double bottom, slightly lower, low, double bottom. They want a break above the neckline for a measured move up. The bears want a break below the double bottom and a measured move down. Sideways, late in a bull trend after a series of buy climaxes. If you do get a bull breakout, this is probably going to be the final bull flag before the market evolves into a trading range. I can draw a bull trend line below and create a parallel. And you can see the market is trying to break above the top of the bull channel. 75% chance the breakout will fail and we'll get down to the bottom of the channel. Possibly a parabolic wedge. One, two, three. So another reason why this general area is resistance. On the weekly chart, one, two, three. This area on the daily chart is simply this area on the weekly chart. And there's a wedge here, which is this line, parabolic wedge. But there's also this line, which is this line here. So not only is there a parabolic wedge on the daily chart. I do not have it drawn in, but it would be here, up here. There's a much larger wedge on the weekly chart. Again, another reason why this is resistance. The bears tried to get a top here. Instead, we get a bull breakout. A double top this high, that high, bull breakout, measured move up. Here's that measured move target. More resistance. The more reasons why this price level is resistance, the more likely this bi-climax is simply a bi-vacuum test of that resistance and an exhaustive end of the move, an exhaustive bi-climax. Cell climaxes end at support. And it's always good to look for support. We have cell climax. A one-bar cell climax. A two-bar cell climax. A two-bar cell climax. And a two-bar cell climax. This is stronger than all of these bars. It's comparable to the strength here. But it's a strong cell climax. A strong breakout, late in a bear trend. You have to be thinking that it's a probable exhaustion gap. A gap initially this close and that low. Once you get the reversal, the bears are trying to resume down here. The gap is this high and that low. And you can see the gap closed. Chances are we'll get at least to the top of the cell climax. And we got much more. In fact, we got more than a measured move up. From the neckline of the potential double top, potential double top this high, and then here or here. And we broke above it and went for a measured move up. Consecutive cell climaxes. Traders have to be ready for a possible reversal. And you look for other reasons as well. Horizontal trading, late in a bear trend. If you get a bear breakout, a probable final bear flag. And then we have a break below a trading range. So, traders will look for a reversal around a measured move down. Double top here. Fell below that neckline more than a measured move down, which would have been here. Traders then look at a measured move based upon the entire trading range. Neckline. And here's the measured move target. Sell climax, leg one. Pull back, leg two. Another reason why there could be some profit taking there. Three pushes down, so a wedge. And we got a reversal up. Another reason why this is probably going to be an exhaustive end of the bear trend. And that the market would then either reverse into a bull trend or evolve into a trading range. I talked about what I mean by climax in this video. A climax is simply a breakout, a trend bar, or a series of trend bars occurring late in a trend. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on climaxes. members left over 10 at the back. They from a extreme tenemos deliever to be chatting all the time. We have done Siarly in the world right now. Whatever I'm experiencing this… This is the first time of subscribers you guys are able to earn. Lawn each pay attention to the trainees. To beинеar, let me give off their children's bend. If you wish to hit our children's bend which is ordinary… You'd love to be in your life or at their honeymoon.