 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability. Believe it or not, every trader is 90% certain that they will reach their profit target. And I think that's interesting and most traders do not think about it. But when the market gets very close to your target, your stop is far away, yet you continue to hold your position and rely on your stop. You can only do that if you're 90% certain that your target will be hit before your stop will be hit. I think it's really important to understand the 40 to 60% rule. During 90% of the bars on any chart, traders can buy or sell at any time and make money if they manage their trades correctly. Finally, I want to talk about the probability within a trading range. It's high for the bears near the top. It's high for the bulls near the bottom. Let's say you bought a 50% pullback from this bull breakout. And you're looking to take profits on a test of the high. Your stop is below the bottom of the bull breakout. And let's say you have a limit order to take half off if the market gets back to the high. Let's say the market is racing up as it did and it hits your limit order, but did not go above your limit order. Usually the market has to go at least a little bit above your limit order before it gets filled. But the instant that it hits your limit order, you're usually not filled. Think about that. The market usually has to go at least one tick above or one pip above the limit order before you get filled, before you can sell for a profit. Yet, what do you do? The market just hits your limit order, you're not filled. You're going to hold for a few more seconds at least to see if you get that one additional tick or pip that goes above your limit order so that your order will be filled. Yet, your stop is still all the way down here or maybe here. So you're risking far more than 10 ticks or 10 pips to make that final one tick or pip. You can only hold on to your trade if you believe that the probability of making that one tick or pip is at least 90%. Otherwise, you cannot risk down to here or down to here to make one tick or one pip. You need that 90% certainty to have a positive traders equation. And that means that on almost any trade where you have a limit order to take profits, at least briefly, you are 90% certain about the probability of making a profit. Whenever the probability is very high, the risk reward has to be terrible. There has to be an institution willing to do the opposite of what you're doing. If your reward is only one tick or one pip and your risk is 10 ticks, 10 pips or more, obviously that's a horrible risk reward ratio. However, a horrible risk reward ratio goes hand in hand with a very high probability of success. Usually when you have a very small profit target, you have a very high probability of success. The opposite of that is also true. If you have a very tight stop, you have a very low risk, you're always having a very low probability of making a profit. So tight stops usually lose. Small rewards usually win, but your risk is big. Let's go back to this bull. It just hit his limit order and it's not yet filled. It needs to go one tick or one pip higher for him to get filled. Yet his stop is here or here. The reward at this point is only one tick or one pip if it's a Forex trade. Yet the risk might be 10 ticks, might be 20 or 30 ticks or 20 or 30 pips. You're a rational trader. A rational person can only do that if he's very confident that he'll get his profit before his stop is hit. And that means that you have to be at least 90% certain that you're going to make your reward before your stop is hit. And that means that on almost every trade, at least briefly, you're 90% certain of something. When the market gets to your limit order and does not yet fill it, and you continue to hold your position, yet your stop is far away relative to your reward, you have to be 90% certain that you'll get your reward before your stop is hit. Let's say that your risk is greater than your reward. Let's say you're using a wide stop and you're scalping. Most traders cannot do that because they have to win 70% of the time just to break even. And therefore, most traders cannot profitably scalp day after day, year after year. As a result, most traders should look for swing trades. A swing trade, a reward at least twice as big as your risk. That is the single best way for traders to become consistently profitable. Some traders can comfortably scalp for their entire careers, but that is a very small number. The vast majority of profitable traders cannot scalp profitably, and they cannot do it comfortably. A lot of very experienced traders can scalp, but they hate it. They're stressed out. It's not fun, and they don't do it. They would rather swing trade. These are all reasonable scalps. Selling below here for a scalp, buying above here for a scalp. These are all selling, buying, buying, buying, buying. On a chart with about 70 or 80 bars, there are eight or nine obvious scalps. There are actually many more if you include limit order scalps, but most traders cannot take all of those trades, and they certainly cannot be happy trading taking all of those trades. If you look at it, it looks like a good day. You sell, you buy, you sell, you sell again, you buy, and you end up with a lot of profitable trades. However, a lot of those traders, especially if they're beginners, if they took this sell, they probably would have taken that buy and this buy, and they would have sold here, and they would have bought here, and all of these gold boxes were losers. And that's the problem with scalping. It's easy to look at a chart and find all the winners. If you're trading in real time, you would have taken a lot of these losers as well, and they would have more than wiped out all of your wins. Remember, if you're scalping, you have to be 70% profitable or better to make a living doing that. Again, there are some traders who do that. I know a lot of traders who win 90% of the time. They're very profitable scalpers. That's unrealistic for most traders. Most traders have to swing trade to be consistently profitable. These blue boxes are the winners, and a beginner who took those scalps probably took a lot of the gold boxes. He would have had eight winners, eight blue boxes, and he would have had 12 losers, the 12 gold boxes, and he would have ended up losing money by the end of the session. An experienced trader can make money scalping during a strong breakout, and many will scale in lower. You can see the video on scaling in. For example, we have a strong breakout here, a buy climax. Traders will buy the close of a strong bull trend bar. They can buy any of these closes, but let's say a bull bought this close. His initial stop is below the bottom of the major higher low, the bottom of the buy climax, the bottom of the breakout. Remember, every trend bar, every series of trend bars is a breakout and a climax. This is the initial risk. The trader was willing to risk all the way down to below the bottom of the bull breakout. A lot of traders will buy more lower. If they do, they want their second entry to be at least a scalp below the first. That's because many will get out when the market gets back to their first entry. They get out, break even on the first entry, and then with a scalp profit on their second entry. Other traders will continue to hold for a reward equal to at least one times their actual risk. If a trader takes this buy, buys more here, and the market starts to turn up, he might raise a stop from here to here. And his actual risk then would be from his entry price to below the low of this bar. His actual risk might be less than that depending on when he entered. If he entered with a limit order here, the market traded down to here and reversed up. That means his actual risk was to just below the low of that bar. This is his actual risk. If he buys here and his actual risk is here, he's in a bull trend. He has a 60% chance of making at least a reward equal to his actual risk. Some bulls will buy here. Some will add on here. Some will just continue to hold long and they'll get out at one times their actual risk. And because the probability is 60% or higher that a bull buying here will make a reward equal to his actual risk, it's a good traders equation. Buy here, whether or not you add on here. If you buy here and the market starts to go up, your actual risk was right here. You have a 60% chance of making at least that reward if you exit at that point. Even though you're taking profits at only one times your actual risk, the traders equation is positive because you're buying in a strong bull trend. There's a 60% chance that you'll make a reward that is equal to your actual risk. And with a risk reward ratio of one, if the probability is 60%, the traders equation is positive. You often hear me talk about the 40-60 rule. When I talk about the 40-60 rule, I mean that 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout. And there's more than a 60% probability that the trend will continue. On the other 90% of the bars on the chart, the probability is really not all that clear. And the setups are not as strong as you want them to be. For any trade during 90% of the bars on any chart, there's a 40-60% probability of the market moving X units in one direction before it moves X units in the other direction. 90% of the time on any chart, the market's in either a channel or a trading range. Only 10% of the bars are in a strong breakout on any chart. When the market's breaking out strongly, traders should only go in the direction of the trade. Strong breakout, only buy, only buy, only buy, only buy. If the market's not obviously in a strong breakout, then it's either in a channel or a trading range. And that's true for 90% of the bars on every chart. When that's true, the probability for the bulls and the bears is always going to be between 40 and 60%. Buying or selling, the probability is never worse than 40%. Buying or selling, the probability is never better than 60% that you'll make X units before you lose X units. 10 pips, 10 ticks, up or down. 25 ticks, 25 pips, up or down. 40-60% chance. Strong, successful breakouts with decent follow-through are rare and they're brief. They don't last all that long. And during those times, the probability that the market will continue in your direction, at least a little bit, is high. More than 60%. 90% of the bars on the chart are not in strong breakouts. And during 90% of the time, inside these blue boxes, the probability is going to be 40-60% for the bulls and bears. Usually between 40-50%. You never have to know the probability exactly. And that's because of the trader's equation. Most traders should be swing trading. And that means they should be going for a reward at least twice as big as their risk. And they only need a 40% probability for that to be a profitable trade. And since 90% of the bars on the chart, whether you buy or sell, you have at least a 40% chance of making a profit. If you go for a reward that is at least twice as big as your risk, you have a profitable strategy. During the green boxes, you have better than a 60% probability. The market will continue in that direction. During the blue boxes, your probability is 60% or less, but it's not less than 40%. The green boxes only trade in the direction of the trend. The blue boxes, you can make money buying or selling as long as you go for a reward two times your risk. That risk-reward ratio results in a positive trader's equation even if the probability of success is only 40%. That's very important to know. That tells you that 90% of the time, you don't have to worry about the probability. Just assume that it's at least 40% for buying or selling. And as long as you go for a reward at least twice your risk, the math is good. You have a positive trader's equation. Even if you win only 40% of the time. Buying or selling anywhere in here or in here or in here. You have at least a 40% chance of making a profit if you go for a reward twice as big as your risk. You determine what your risk is by placing your stock. And as long as you go for a reward that's at least twice as great, you're going to have a positive trader's equation. Even if you win only 40% of the time. Therefore, 90% of the time when the market is not breaking out strongly, always go for a reward at least two times your risk. That compensates for whatever low probability you have and it results in a positive trader's equation. And it's a profitable strategy. Your probability is never going to be less than 40% buying or selling during 90% of the bars on the chart. When you're in a strong bull breakout, you should not sell. You should only buy. At the times when you're not in a strong breakout up or down, you can buy or sell and make money. Because you know the probability of buying or selling is going to be at least 40%. Remember, you can buy or sell and that means both the bulls and the bears can have a positive trader's equation. The probability of most swing trades is only between 40 and 50%. And that's true of a trader swing trading in the opposite direction as well. If you're buying, 40% chance you make money for a swing trade. And the institution taking the opposite side of your trade, if it is swing trading as well, it only has a 40 to 50% chance of making a profit or making a reward two times the risk. Both of you have a good trader's equation. Both the bulls and bears can lose more than 50% of the time and consistently make money. As long as their reward is at least twice their risk. Since you can buy or sell during 90% of the bars on the chart, the key to making money is money management. You have to use a reasonable stop, reasonable risk. And you have to try for a reward that is at least twice as big as your risk. That good risk reward ratio overcomes the low probability. Remember, your probability is always at least 40%, but often it is only 40%. If you have a reward that is at least twice your risk, if that's your target, that overcomes the low probability and keeps the trader's equation positive. Here we're in a bear channel. We have four pushes down. One, two, three, four. So it's a high four buy. You can look at it as consecutive bottoms. We tried to get bottom here, but we have a bear breakout. And we tried to bottom again and then the second attempt at the bottom. And this is a micro double bottom. Down, up, down, and then trying to go up. Chances are the market's going to have 10 bars, two legs, sideways, two up after a high four buy at the bottom of a channel. We have consecutive complex bottoms. We tried to bottom one, two. Tried to reverse up. We got a bear breakout. Tried to bottom again. One, two. Complex bottom, two attempts up. A bear breakout. Complex bottom, two attempts up. We have a micro double bottom as well. Probably going to get at least 10 bars, two legs, sideways, two up. TBTL. 10 bars, two legs. We sold off in a wedge, three pushes down. One, two, three. And we're trying to reverse up at the signal bar high over here. And we have a decent bull signal bar here and a micro double bottom with also a good bull bar. We have a micro double bottom with a good buy signal bar here and another good bull bar here. This is a reasonable buy looking for at least a small second leg up. It's also a higher low major trend reversal. Bear trend, strong bull breakout to a higher low, and a wedge bull flag, three pushes down. One, two, and then three. The bulls got their minimum goal. They have a second leg sideways to up. Here it's mostly sideways. Yet, look what's happening now. We have a potential triangle, three reversals down. One, two, and three. The bears have a good signal bar and a decent entry bar. The bears also look at this as a double top lower high. A double top, the second high is a little bit lower. It therefore is a low two sell signal below the low of this bear bar getting filled right here. As is always the case when the market starts to go sideways, there is a decent buy signal and a decent sell signal. In this particular case, the bulls have bought here probably have to exit. They have a double top lower high and a good sell signal bar, and they have their second leg up. Because the bears have a reasonable sell signal, a triangle and a bear trend, and a decent sell signal bar, and the bulls got their second leg up, the bulls exit. And the bears will sell, looking for a swing down. And the bears got their swing down. Here we have a bull trend, a bear break below the bull trend, and we have a lower high and another lower high. The bears have a decent sell setup for a swing down, a lower high major trend reversal, even though we're still in a bull trend. In addition, they have a small double top, and this double top is a lower high. So it's a double top, lower high, major trend reversal. That's a common pattern in a tight trading range. When you have a tight trading range, there's a double top and a lower high. Sometimes it's a higher high, but usually it's a lower high. It's a reasonable short, 40% chance you'll get a swing down. For the bulls, this is a bull trend, a bear breakout, but this is a bull flag. This is a breakout of the bull flag, and this is a pullback from that breakout, and it's creating another bull flag. Small bull trend, and then a double bottom, this low, that low. The market's been sideways for about 50 bars. There's always going to be a reasonable swing setup for the bears, and a reasonable swing setup for the bulls. The bears who sold here or here, they will get out above this bull bar. We have a decent bull bar here, and then a second entry here. The bears will give up, and the bulls will buy. We have a bull trend, a bear reversal, but it's a bear channel, a bull flag, and then we have a bull breakout. And this whole bear channel is a pullback from this bull breakout. And now we have a high 2 buy, and a higher low. The market's still always in long. The bears get out, and the bulls buy. Looking for a swing up. There's also a small triangle. Whenever there's an II, this bar is inside that bar, this bar is inside that bar, and this bar is inside that bar, so it's an II. It's always a triangle on a smaller timeframe chart. You don't have to look. You just assume whenever you see an II or an II that it's a triangle on a smaller timeframe chart, and therefore a breakout mode pattern on this chart. It's a nested triangle. We have a reversal down, a second reversal down, maybe a third reversal down, maybe a third reversal down here. So it's a large triangle, a nested triangle, a small triangle, and a bigger triangle. It does not matter if you call this a triangle or a tight training range. The implication is the same. If the market goes sideways for 20 or more bars and a pullback, the pullback is a training range. Here we have a pullback lasting 20 or 30 bars. Now it's lasted 50 bars, 60 bars. 50% chance the bull trend will resume up. 50% chance you'll get a reversal down from the higher low major trend reversal. 50% chance the bull trend will resume up. I've taught thousands of traders how to trade using price action. And if everybody knows it, how can it work well? Because everything looks easy until you're actually trading it with real money. And the margin for error is very small, and every little mistake works against you. And therefore, it's very difficult to trade consistently well. You can do it, but it takes practice. And those who understand price action better, those who manage their trades better, have a better chance of making money. Even the best analysis is only going to be right 60 to 70% of the time, and you're competing against the smartest people in the world. You often hear traders talk about trading as a zero sum game. In other words, every dollar lost by you is made by me, or vice versa. It's not entirely true. You have fees, you have slippage, you have other costs, overhead costs like bid-ask spread. So it's not exactly zero sum. Also, the world economy has been growing since the beginning of the world economy, and therefore more dollars are going into the economy, and therefore it's not a zero sum game. The pie keeps getting bigger. But over the short run, a day, a week or so, it is a zero sum game. Because over the short run, it is a zero sum game, all you have to do is be better than the average trader to consistently make money. You can study a great trader. Warren Buffett is probably the greatest trader of the past 50 years. And you could watch him every minute of every day for a year, and then try doing what he's doing on your own, and you'll still lose money. Because it takes a lot of experience. You could watch someone play the violin for a year, and then try to play the violin, and you'll sound terrible. It just takes a lot of experience. Soccer as well. There's a big difference between knowing how to play soccer, and knowing how to play it well enough to make a living, to have people pay you to do it. So it does not matter if everyone knows basic price action. Can they apply it, and can they manage their trades well? That's the difference between making money and not making money. If you ever play poker, every player quickly decides who the weakest player is. That's the easiest person from whom you can take money. They're going to lose all the time. That person is the mark. In general, if you're playing poker, and you don't know who the mark is, then you're the mark. You're the person everyone's trying to take money from. In trading, if you don't know price action well enough to understand who's going to be trapped in a trade, you'll soon discover that it's you. You really have to understand price action to trade profitably. It's really important whenever you take any trade to believe that the exact opposite of what you believe is going to happen, is going to happen at least 40% of the time. Because that's true. The probability is always 40 to 60% during 90% of the bars on every chart. And therefore, no matter how certain you are that the market's going to do something, there's at least a 40% chance that it's going to be the opposite. The market was in a bear trend here. The bears can argue nested wedge, one, two, three, a bigger wedge, one, two, and then three. You can call it a double bottom, one, two, and a decent bull bar. And it's a second entry buy. A decent bull bar here. It triggered by going above that. Now we have a second entry buy. And a lot of bears will exit here. The channel is tight. They know the reversal is probably minor. And it will result either in a bear flag or a trading range. We're going sideways. The bulls are hoping that this is a bear trend, bull breakout, and a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal, or a head and shoulders bottom, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Again, it's reasonable to exit there as well. Another attempt at a double bottom or a higher low, major trend reversal, and a good bull bar. You can call it a triangle if you want. Three reversals up, one, two, three, and a horizontal trading range. Good traders, if they get trapped out of a good trade, are always looking to sell again. The market stayed always in short all the way down. And therefore, if a bear exit, he needs to sell again below a bear bar. So he'll sell below that bear bar. If he exits here, he's going to sell below a bear bar. Either below that bear bar or that bear bar. And the same here. If the bear exits above that bull bar and the market does not become always in long, it's still always in short, he has to sell again below a bear bar. Like below that bear bar or below that bull low. A good trader is not going to let himself be trapped out of a trade for long. If the market is still always in short and he exits and he wants to trade always in, he wants to stay in the market all the time, he has to sell again below a bear bar. And the opposite is true in a bull trend. In a trading range, the probability is high for the bears near the top and high for the bulls near the bottom. The market is clearly going sideways here. And at some point you decide this is the upper half of the range. This is the lower half of the range. In general, you want to buy low, sell high and scalp. If it's in the top half, it's better to look to sell. If it's in the bottom half, it's better to look to buy. And it's also better to look to take quick profits, scalp, because chances are the market's going to stay in the range. The probability for making money is higher in the upper half if you're a bear looking to sell. And the probability for profits is better for the bulls in the lower half. Buy low, sell high. Bears make money selling in the upper half. Bulls make money buying in the lower half. In the top third, the probability can be very high for the bears. For example, if you're looking to make X number of ticks or pips, there's usually a 60% chance that you'll get your target before your stop is hit if the stop is just as far. So 10 ticks or 10 pips looking to sell in the upper third, 60% chance you'll reach your 10 pips or 10 ticks profit before a 10 ticks or 10 pips stop is hit. Doesn't matter. 10 ticks, 15 ticks, 27 ticks, 27 pips, up, 27 pips down. In the upper third of a trading range, taking the bear side has a 60% chance of making money. On the lower third of the trading range, taking the bull side has a 60% chance of making money. For example, buying in the bottom third, looking for a 10 pips scalp and risking 10 pips, 60% chance you're going to make money. The middle third is 50-50 chance that buying or selling that you'll make X number of pips or X number of ticks before you lose the same amount. So for example, buying or selling anywhere in the blue, in the middle third of a trading range, and you're looking to make 10 ticks or 10 pips buying, risking 10 ticks or 10 pips below, you have a 50-50 chance that the market will reach your target before it hits your stop. I talked about high probability and how every trader is 90% certain of making money, at least briefly during every trade. When the market hits their limit order and they need only one more tick or one more pip to make money, their stop might be 10 ticks or 10 pips away. They can only hold onto that trade if they are 90% certain that they'll make money, and most traders would hold at least after the first test of their target. The 40-60 rule. During 90% of the bars on every chart, the probability is always at least 40% for any buy or any sell, and it's never greater than 60% for any buy or sell. A good trader can make money buying or selling during 90% of the bars on a chart if he manages his trade correctly. When the market's in a trading range, the probability is high near the top for the bears and high near the bottom for the bulls. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability. I'm Al Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on our screen. I'm Al Brooks Trading Course. This is a fifth of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability. I'm Al Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of six videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability.