 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second in the series of videos about Forex Basics. I'm first going to be talking about the risks involved with Forex Trading, the costs involved, and brokers. Next, I'll talk about Forex symbols, how to create them and what they mean. And finally, I'll talk about the types of quotes that take place in the Forex markets. Most firms do not charge commissions in Forex tradings. They make their money off the bid-ask spread. In some firms, the spread is fairly wide. For example, a 2-pip spread or a 3-pip spread is very difficult to make money if the transaction costs are too high. So if you're trading 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar, and there's a 2-pip bid-ask spread, it costs you $20 to buy and $20 to sell 100,000 units. And some brokers, the transaction costs are very high, makes it very difficult to make money. Other brokers, the transaction costs are low, much easier to make money. When you're trading Forex, make sure to trade at one of the popular big-name brokers because chances are they will have tight bid-ask spreads and it will be easier for you to make money. I'm using Interactive Brokers here because they are a firm that charges commissions. So for example, on any trade, they charge a $2 commission plus 2 tenths of a pip. If you're trading 100,000 units, that is $2 plus $2, a $4 commission. Plus you have to pay the bid-ask spread. The bid-ask spread is tight. Let's say a half a pip, so that's $5. That means you have to pay the commission $4 plus the spread $5, and it costs you $9 to buy and $9 to sell. TradeStation no longer offers Forex trading, but I'm using them as an example of a firm that has a very wide bid-ask spread. So for example, if you look at their quote screen, the bid-ask spread on the euro versus the dollar is 1.7 pips. They did not charge commissions, but they made their money by having a very big bid-ask spread. Total cost of the trade, 1.7 pips. Interactive Brokers, on the other hand, if you look at the spread, it's very tight. It's only a half of a pip, but they also charge commissions of about half of a pip. So your total cost is 1 pip. Well, this is a comparison that shows some firms, even if they charge commissions, they can be cheaper than firms that charge no commission if the bid-ask spread is sufficiently wide. Again, when you choose your firm, make sure to pick a reputable, big, popular firm, because chances are your transaction costs will be the smallest. Now the goal of Forex trading, obviously, to make money. If you're buying 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar, so you're buying the euro and you're selling the dollar, you're expecting the price to go up. Maybe you buy here, and then you sell when it tries to reverse down here, and you make 216 pips profit. And on 100,000 units, that's about $2,000 profit. The trades take place in the cash Forex market. You're buying one currency, you're selling another currency, and there are countless pairs to choose from. And this is an example 60-minute chart. 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar. I want to talk a little bit about Forex symbols. For example, I talked about the euro versus the dollar. And if you're buying 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar, the symbol is made of two parts, euro and dollar. The red, the euro, the first currency, is called the base currency. It's the currency you are buying or selling. So if you're buying 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar, you're buying 100,000 units of the euro. And the second name and the pair is the quote currency. It's also called the secondary currency or the terms currency. And it's the currency price being quoted. I know this sounds confusing, but if you're interested in the basics of terminology, that's what you have to deal with. Nicknames, this is, I think, silly. You know, traders don't use this stuff. Sometimes on television, you'll see somebody talk about, Oh, I bought the cable, which is the British pound versus the dollar. Or I sold the gopher, the dollar versus the yen. It's kind of like a secret handshake knowing what the terms are, but nobody uses them. Let me go back to that 60 minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. Okay, the quote currency is the second name, which is the dollar. In this particular example, if you buy 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar at this price level, which is right here, 1.1278. What that means is it took 1.1278 dollars to buy one euro. So 100,000 unit position is 100,000 units divided by that exchange rate. And that means you're buying 88,000 euros. And it fluctuates constantly. This is at that instant. That's what the price is. Now let's talk about the euro versus the yen. It might be quoted at 1.23.02 bid, 0.03 ask. If you want to buy the yen, you got to pay the higher price on the ask. So you'd be paying 0.03 and you're paying 123.03 yen to buy one euro. And if you're selling, you pay the lower price. Anytime you sell, you pay the lower price. Anytime you buy, you pay the higher price. And that's how the bank makes its money. The broker and the bank make their money. And that difference is the spread. The bid, ask, spread, or simply the spread. Let's say you sold 100,000 units of the euro versus the yen. So you're selling the euro and you're buying the yen. And then you exit down here with 37 pips profit. Since there are $9.01 per pip, then you made $333 in profit. I'll talk about the math later on in the videos. A big problem with Forex markets, less so today, but in the past it was a big problem, is that the firms cheat. They rig the markets. You know, they can front run orders when the orders are big enough to move the markets. And they can collude with other firms to place large orders to move the markets. They can buy information from corrupt friends in government before news comes out. They can trade on inside information. Much less a problem in the United States and much less a problem internationally now. The governments are cracking down. There's a thing in Forex trading called the London 4pm fix. And in the past it was a way that firms could cheat. What happened was they would set the prices 30 seconds before and after 4 o'clock London time. And some firms would collude to make the price too high or too low. They would place huge trades. And then if the price is too high, for example, they would quickly sell and make a profit. If they could drive the price down too low, they would buy and make a profit. That tiny window allowed firms to submit huge orders, a lot of orders, very quickly before anyone has a chance to react. They could fix the price too high. And then they could sell and make a profit. And that little window, that one minute window now is five minutes. It begins two and a half minutes before 4 o'clock and it ends two and a half minutes after 4 o'clock. Firms might still collude to move the market briefly and make profits, but it's much less a problem and has no effect on us. As traders, I would not worry about firms, governments cheating. The markets are pretty honest and reliable at this point. I'm going to talk a little bit about quotes right now. In stocks and in the E-mini, you hear about ticks. Each little move up or down is a tick. And in the Forex markets, each little move up or down is a pip. And pip was the smallest price change, but it's no longer the case. For example, in the Euro versus the dollar, here's a one minute chart. You got 1.1179. That fourth digit is the pip. So that's nine pips. And in all of the markets, it would be called ticks. Every little move up and down is a tick. In the Forex market, it can go from eight to nine to zero to one, two, three. Each one of those little steps is a pip. And if it were a stock, it would be a tick. And the reason why I put smallest in quotes is because a lot of firms now have fractional pips and they add one or two more digits. As traders, they're totally meaningless. They change so fast that you cannot even see them. Most Forex pairs have four decimal places, but the Japanese Yen has two decimal places. So the dollar versus the Yen, two decimal places. The Euro versus the dollar, four decimal places. And most brokers now add an additional decimal place, a fractional pip, presumably to allow tighter bid-ask spreads. Here, nine is the fractional pip, four is the pip. If it drops to three, it dropped one pip. If it goes up to six, it goes up two pips. And here in the Euro versus the dollar, this is the fractional pip. And then the nine is the pip digit. If nine goes up to zero, the market went up one pip. I said most brokers provide quotes with fractional pips. And that's true with charts as well. I only pay attention to the four digits in most payers. And then in the end, I pay attention to the two digits. But the reality is most brokers add a digit, a fractional pip. And they change so fast, I can't even see them. And I don't pay any attention to them when I'm trading. Euro versus the dollar. The fourth digit is the pip. And then the fifth digit or sixth are fractional pips. And in the end, the second digit is the pip. And the third is a fractional pip. Sometimes they have a fourth as well. When traders compare how they're doing with one another, they talk about the number of pips made or lost per day. They usually do not talk about their position size. So one trader might be trading 10,000 units. Another trader might be trading a million units or five million units. And traders don't like to say, I made $7,000 today or I made $26 today. Instead, they tend to talk in terms of pips. How many pips did they make today? How many pips did they lose today? Traders want privacy. They don't want anyone to know how much they're making or how much they're losing. However, if you talk in terms of pips, you made 26 pips profit today or the other person made 13 pips profit today. It allows you to compare how well one trader is doing compared to another. Here we have a strong bear breakout, strong follow through. Let's say a trader sells that close. And then later in the session, the trader buys back down here and they made 25 pips profit. So they sold at 1.0940 and then they bought back at 15 and that's a 25 pips profit. Regardless of their position size, whether they traded 10,000 units or a million units, they made 25 pips profit. If a trader bought the euro versus the dollar at 1.3124, you can add the fractional pip over here, six, and then sold it here. He made 2.1 pips profit. And most traders ignore the fractional pip. So instead of saying I made 2.1 pips profit, the trader would say I made two pips. And then if he adds up all of his pips, won or lost in the different crosses, the different pairs during the day. So he made 31.4 pips in the dollar yen. He lost 8.8 pips in the euro versus the Australian dollar. If you add all of that up, he made 37.4 pips and he will say, oh, I made 37 pips today. In this video, I talked about the risks of trading, the costs of trading, and differences among the brokers. I talked about how the Forex Pairs symbols are constructed. And I also talked about the types of quotes, pips, and fractional pips. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. And this particular video is the second of five videos in the Forex Basics. This is Al Brooks. This place, the world is général overjud telling us to be related to the margin dev. If the angels told us, this lists out for 1,800 pips and come back inま STEEN as long as possible. And this is the portion of guides who don't catch the price of trading, what we do today is that the price of trading, which does considerably need interfering with the same price. But my 오른 terugilege contre them in the政府ish one who embankment, this place equilibrio to buy a tradingoser platform.