 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on losing when a good trade goes bad. Whenever you're trading and your premise changes, you have to change the style that you're trading. Next, I want to talk about how traders can get trapped and the importance of recognizing the trap as soon as possible and then working your way out of the bad trade. The market's in a bear trend. There's a bear breakout, pair of bear bars, decent follow through. However, now the market is starting to go sideways and the pullback is lasting a lot of bars. We have prominent tails, small bars, dojis. The market's starting to enter a tight trading range. It's still always in short. So your premise of a bear trend is still valid. However, if you want, you can exit, for example, on the second leg up above a bull bar, get out here. If you want to be trading always in, you simply look to sell again below a bear bar on a reversal back down. Is this a good trade that has gone bad? Well, it's certainly not behaving the way you want it to behave, but your premise is still valid. It's still a bear trend. It's still always in short. As long as it stays below this stop and does not start to accelerate to the upside, the odds are it'll either go down or down and sideways. This is a big low two short, two legs up, one pull back two. A decent sell signal bar. The second leg up had two smaller legs, one pull back two. That's good for the bears. You have a sell signal bar closing on its low. Reasonable to go short. If a person got out, this is a reasonable sell setup looking for a second leg down. One pull back and two. You're getting a second signal. Theoretically bears who sold here would consider adding on, but usually if they're going to add on to the position, they want the second signal to be the size of a scalp higher or two to three times the size of a scalp higher. Most traders would not add to a short here. But if they did get out here and they looked at this and saw it as a large low two bear flag and the market's still always in short, it's reasonable to sell below the low of that bear bar. At the end of the session, the bulls are getting bull bars here, here, here, closing on its high. Big bull body. And now we get a micro double bottom with a bull bar closing on its high. Reasonable to get out of your trade right here. The bears have a double top. The bulls have a double bottom. The bulls have a breakout and they have the minimum follow through that they need. They have the absence of a bear body. A close above the top of the double top. It's always in long. At this point, you know one of two things is likely. Either the market's going to continue higher, bull trend, or you're going to get a deep pull back in a trading range. At this point, the likelihood of a bear trend is small. Because of that, he can buy the close of this bar or the close of the follow through bar and use an appropriate stop below the bottom of the bull trend. Betting that even if we reverse down, it would be a bear leg in a trading range and it would be followed by a bull leg in the trading range. And that would get him back to his original entry price and he could get out break even or with a small loss. If he scaled in lower, he could get out with a profit on his lower entry. He's buying here because he's hoping the market goes straight up. He's confident that if it reverses down, it'll form a higher low and come back to his entry price. Reasonable to take the buy. You have a double top and a double bottom and the bulls broke above the double top. This high is the neckline of this double bottom. It's the highest price between these two lows. A reasonable buy. Close above the high. A second close above the high. Strong reversal down. A pair of decent sized bear bodies. The bear bodies are increasing in size. A doji and then a small bear bar. And then a bigger bear body. And then an even bigger bear body closing on its low. But it's still above the stop and it's not enough to convince traders that the bears have taken control. Remember, the bulls who bought here knew the odds favored either a second leg up or a deep pullback and a trading range, which is what they got. And ultimately there was a second leg up later in the session. Is it always in short? No. Therefore, the bulls can still stay long and rely on their stop. They can even buy this close, betting that the bear reversal attempt will fail. The sell off is strong enough so the traders believe at this point that it's no longer going to be a bull trend. That we're probably going to go sideways. When you have five bars down and the bear bodies are increasing in size and the bull trend resumes up, the resumption is usually a minor reversal in a trading range and it probably will be followed by at least one more leg down. Big up, big down, big confusion, trading range likely. Therefore, traders will change their trading strategy. Instead of buying at any price, including high, betting on higher prices, now they'd rather buy low and sell high. If a trader bought this close and he sees the strong sell off, he can buy more above a good bull bar, expecting that the sell off will be a bare leg in a trading range and the market will come back to his original price. He can get off break even on his first entry and with a small profit on his second entry. If the bull who bought here and bought more here was extremely disappointed by this, he might be afraid the market might not rally back to his original price. He might instead try to scale in to avoid a loss. Try to get out at the midpoint between his two buys here and here. And here's his average price. He could get out here and avoid a loss. If he exits here, he gets out break even on his first buy and with a profit on his lower buy. Whenever there's a strong reversal down like that right after you buy, it's okay to exit. And then if you do, you can look to buy again if the bull trend resumes. For example, this is five bars down. The bear bodies are increasing. The bears have two decent sized bodies. It's reasonable to exit on the close of that bear bar. However, the market's still always in long. There are scale in bulls who bought here and who are looking for a bull bar and they'll buy more above the bull bar. If a trader exited here, he could buy again above that bull bar knowing that a lot of bulls will be buying looking for a test back up to the high close. The bears who shorted are going to be taking profits. The bulls who bought buy more. The bulls who get out buy more above the bull bar. Since it's still always in long. Now we have a double bottom. They could buy here as well. Three consecutive reasonably strong bear bars. Good sized bodies. Two of them closing near their lows. One closing just below the midpoint. It's a possible sell the close bear trend. Even though we have not yet closed below all the bars to the left. Some bears will sell that close hoping that this double top will break below the neckline and fall for at least a measured move down. Reasonable to put your stop above the top of the bear reversal. If a bear who sold that close now sees this big doji bar, he knows the market rallied strongly and came back down here. He might be concerned that he's buying the bottom of a trading range. This reversal up was more than what the bears who sold this close wanted. Some bears whenever they see a sell the close bar. Some bears whenever they see a sell the close bar. Will place a limit order to sell more one or two times minimum scalp size higher. For example right here. If it was a forex market this might be 10 pips higher. If it's the e-mini it might be one or two points higher. They do that betting that the first reversal up will fail and the market will have to test this close. Some traders will simply place a limit order to sell at the high of the bear bar. Betting that it's a bad buy signal bar and therefore more sellers above. A lot of the traders would be concerned that the market rallied that far up after the three bear bars and the break below the earlier low. Their premise therefore might now be that we're in a trading range or creating a double bottom. Instead of in a sell the close bear trend. Many of these bears who sold this close will now place a limit order to get out at that close. The market has to go one tick below the close for them to get out. Which it did. And then you see this strong reversal. The remaining bears are giving up. A give up bar. Chances are we're going at least a little higher. We have a strong reversal down. Decent sized bear bars. Closing at or near their lows. We have four consecutive bear bars. The odds are the first reversal up will be minor. And the best the bulls will get is a trading range. That is what the odds are. But it's not a guarantee. In any case it's a sell the close bear trend either starting here or starting here. Doji bar. A lot of bears would not sell this close. They would be concerned that the market might be getting a pullback. But let's say a bear did sell one of those two low closes. He's hoping that the market will keep going down. He's confident that if it starts to go up. If he manages his trade correctly. He can avoid a loss. And he might even be able to make a profit. Therefore, the bear might place a limit order to scale in at least the size of a minimum scalp above his first entry. Looking to get out break even on his first entry. And with a profit on the second. So let's say he sold the size of a scalp above his first entry at this close. And then he places a limit order to get out at this close. To get filled, the market has to fall just below that close. But look what happened. Look at this low. Look at that close. It did not fall below that close. What do you think the price is? What do you think the disappointed bears are going to do? They tried to get out break even and they could not. Now they're concerned that they might be trapped. They might then raise their limit order from this close to a little bit above. Maybe a tick or two above or a pip or two above. Hoping to get out with a profit on their second entry and break even on their first. The bears who tried to get out with their limit order did not get filled. And therefore a lot of them will raise their limit order. But look what happened here. The market came down to just above that low, but not down to that low. And chances are the bears who raised their limit order trying to get out with a small profit here and a small loss here were unable to get filled. The market rallied again. What's going to happen here? The bears are going to give up. So they gave up here and other bears gave up here. So if you see sell the closed bears unable to get out once and then if they raise their limit order unable to get out a second time, they're going to give up. And that usually creates a reversal. And therefore if you're short for any reason, let's say you sold this close and you have your stop up here, you know that bears are getting trapped. They're unable to get out and they're unable to get out at an even worse price. They're going to give up. Therefore, if you're still short and you did not get out, you have to get out. For example, above this second bull bar. I'm always paying attention to trapped traders because if there are trapped traders, then there's fuel, there's energy for the market to make a move. We know that the bears are sold this close, failed to get out here, they were trapped, they raised their limit order, and they're still trapped, still did not get filled. That increases the chances that we're going to get a reversal. Tight bear channel. Even if we do get a reversal, it probably will be minor, which means the best the bulls probably will get is a trading range. And they did. This went above this high, but it still stayed sideways for about 30 or 40 bars. Bears who twice tried to get out without a loss failed, and therefore they should get out, take the loss rather than risk having it become a big loss. You don't want it to hit the stop. If you know that you're wrong and the market's telling you that you're wrong to be short, don't wait for your stop to get hit. Simply get out. The bulls see that the bears are trapped, and they expect that the market's going to rally far enough up for them to make at least a scalp. And they're going to buy exactly where the bears are getting out. Some of the bulls place limit orders to buy at this close, expecting that after this bull bar, the bears would try to buy at that close. If the bears are going to buy instead of sell, bulls want to buy as well. So they were buying at that close or just a little bit above. And then after this reversal, they knew the bears would be more scared. And the bulls who were flat would raise their limit order to buy a little bit above that close, just the way the bears did. And then stop order bulls would buy above this pair of bull bars closing on their highs after seeing trapped bears, knowing that the bears would give up and buy back their shorts. Three consecutive bull bars closing above their midpoints near their highs. If you're still short, you have to get up. You cannot wait for your stop to be hit because your stop is probably going to get hit. Your premise of a strong bear trend is no longer valid. The market is telling you that you're wrong. Whenever you take a reasonable trade and you get an immediate reversal, 90% of the time the market will let you out without a loss if you manage your trade correctly, which means you use an appropriate stop and you scale in. Sometimes you may not be able to get out without a loss for a lot of bars, 10, 20 or 30 bars. And that was the case here. A test of your entry does not mean the market falls below your close. It means that it gets near your close. Close enough so that traders start to buy back their shorts if they're short. Close enough so bulls will buy, betting that the bears will be trapped. Close enough so that they'll be trapped. The bears were trapped twice, could not get out here, could not get out even when they raised their limit order. They're trapped into a losing trade. Whenever the bears are trapped and you know they're buying back their shorts, they're not going to be eager to sell again a bar or two later. The odds are you're going to get at least two legs up. The bulls who did not buy know the bears are trapped. They know that the bears will buy back their shorts on any minor reversal down and the bulls therefore will buy as well. At this point, is it a buy the close bull trend? I would not call it a buy the close bull trend. It's a tight bull channel, but big tail on top and big down, big up, big confusion, probably a trading range. Long enough rally, first reversal down, probably minor. That means either a bull flag or a trading range. Therefore, the risk of buying that close is not great. If you manage your trade correctly, you'll either make a profit or you'll avoid a loss. A bull who bought here probably would put a stop all the way down here. Big down, big up trading range likely. And if you're buying at the top of the range, hoping that the market's entering a bull trend, you need a stop below the bottom of the range. After this big bear bar, these bulls were disappointed. They concluded that instead of the market going straight up, we're probably going sideways. A lot of them simply placed a limit order to get out break even because their premise of a bull trend is wrong. They see that it's wrong. This bear bar tells them that it's wrong and therefore it's a trading range and they're long at the top. They'll try to get out break even at the top because you don't want to be long or holding long or buying at the top of a developing trading range. If the bulls did not take their profit here, they got trapped. You can see how the market immediately reversed down once it got above that close. A lot of the ones who were hoping for a bull trend after they see this will place a limit order to get out at that close. You can see it went just above the close and sold off a second time. That tells you that the bulls do not want to be holding long at this price and therefore bulls are not going to be buying here. They're going to be looking to buy lower. The bulls who did not get out here or here will give up and will probably get a couple legs sideways to down. Some will get out below this micro double top and then we have a pullback with a bear bar closing on its low. Some will get out here. They're doubtful that we're going to go very far up and therefore the ones who did not get out, some of them will sell out of their longs above this bull bar trying to minimize their loss. Buy the close bull trend? Not all that strong but certainly reasonable to buy. The bulls who are buying here are hoping the market continues up. They're confident that the rally is strong enough so that even if it reverses down, the reversal will be minor. Stay above this low and it will be followed by a test back up to this high. Maybe a resumption of the bull trend. If you are a buy the close bull and you happen to buy this close and then you see this bear bar, you're disappointed. A lot of the bulls who buy here will wait to see if we get three or four bear bars and then they'll get out at the market. They're confident the reversal is still minor and they'll look to buy again on a resumption back up especially above a decent bull bar like above this bar or above this bar. Reasonable to buy the close. Whenever you have a reasonable buy the close entry, 90% of the time you can manage your trade well enough to either make a profit or avoid a loss. Therefore the buy the close bulls, they never really had a chance to get out. It never went back above this close. It immediately turned down. Maybe they could have gotten out here. I don't think this bear bar was enough to disappoint a lot of them so it's reasonable for them to hold long. Betting that even if we sell off for 10 or 20 bars, it'll come back up to that close. We're betting that instead of a bear trend after such a strong rally. The first reversal down will be minor and we should get back up to that close again and form a trading range instead of a bear trend. Some computers will read this as a parabolic wedge. One, two, three, four or one, two and then three. And with that, a lot of bulls will get out simply below the bear bar because of a possible parabolic wedge top. But they don't have to. Some will wait until three or four bear closes and then get out, afraid that we'll have an endless pullback and then a bear breakout. Others say, yeah, it's three bars, four bear bars, but none of them is very big. Some of them are not closing on their lows. This sell off looks weaker than this rally. We're probably going to get a higher low and a trading range instead of a bear trend. Let's say you look at this and say, oh, that's a buy the close bull trend. Breaking out to a new high of the day. We have three consecutive bull bars. And let's say you happen to buy this close. It's not a great buy because we have a large two legged move. One pullback, two, possible tight trading range, final flag, and two buy climaxes here, pause, here. However, it's not unreasonable to take that buy, hoping that we're going to keep going up. Reasonable to put a stop below the bottom of the tight range, below this breakout, below the bottom of this bull swing. All reasonable choices. However, once you conclude that your premise is no longer valid, it's better just to get out instead of letting your stop get hit. Closed by the close bar was followed by a big bear bar closing on its low. It's two legs up, one pullback, two. Each subdivided into two. One pullback, two. And then one pullback, two. That increases the chances that we're going to get a deeper pullback. With a strong bear bar, it's reasonable to get out below the low of that bear bar and just take a loss. Possible parabolic wedge here. One, two, three. And then the bear bar closing on its low. It is reasonable to get out here. However, the bull's channel is tight. A lot of bulls would like more confirmation that the bears are taking control. They'll wait for three or four bear bars and then get out. The loss is still not particularly big, especially if they're looking for a swing up. So, some will get out on the second consecutive big bear bar. Others will get out on the third. The ones who did not gave up here. You can see this bar is bigger and it represents the final bulls giving up. The bears, once they see three bear bars closing on their lows with reasonable context for the bears, they'll start selling closes. Once they saw this close, a lot of bears sold the market. The remaining bulls sold as well. And then we have a breakout bar here. Bears are selling exactly where the bulls are getting out, especially by this third close. A lot of bears believe we're going to get at least two legs down. And therefore, if we try to resume up, we'll get a lower high and then another leg down. By this third close, the market's always in short. If you're a by the close bull, you cannot be holding long once you believe the market's always in short. And therefore, you get out exactly where the bears took control. And that's by the close of this third bar. You get out no later than here. You can't wait for your stop to get hit because the market's always in short. It's probably going lower and your stop probably will get hit. Maybe this stop will get hit as well. And it did. If the bulls give up, chances are we're going to get a swing down and at least two legs, maybe 10 bars two legs as a minimum goal. If a bull did get out below this bear bar or on the second or third bear close and there's a good looking buy signal bar, the bulls can always buy back again. If you buy the close and it reverses down strongly, you missed a topping pattern and a sell signal. And even if you do not see the sell signal, you can see that you're clearly wrong and you have to get out. Don't wait and say, oh my gosh, it's reversing down. There has to be some pattern here that I'm not seeing. You don't have to see that. Once you see three bear bars closing on their lows, the market's going down. You have to get out of any logs. Whenever you're trading and your premise changes, you have to change what you're doing. If you're buying thinking it's a bull trend and now it's clearly a trading range, you have to modify your style of trading and make it appropriate for a trading range. Trap traders provide fuel for a trade. If bears sell at the bottom and the market's starting to reverse up, the bears are going to be trapped and they have to buy back their shorts. If the bulls buy and the market immediately reverses down, they have to get out as well. For example, if you're long and the bears get three consecutive bear bars closing on their lows, don't wait for your stop to get hit. The market has changed what it's doing. Your premise is no longer valid and you have to get out. You just sell out of your long at the market on the close of that third bear bar. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on losing when a good trade goes bad. which speaker plays aços of the present one in the conversation with auins one. Thanks, Bruce! A vision for this song has changed. This probably won't go bold to the front alt alert.