 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on buying and selling pressure. I'm going to begin by talking about buying and selling pressure within trading ranges, and then I will talk about it within channels. Whenever I look at a trading range, I'm always looking for signs of sustained buying and pressure. And if there's more buying pressure, then I think a bull breakout will be likely. And I think of the market as always in long, even though it's still in a trading range. On the other hand, if there's more selling pressure in the trading range, then I think a bear breakout is more likely. And I think of the market as always in short. What do I look for? Well, signs of buying and selling pressure. I want to see bull bars if I'm looking for a bull breakout. And I want to see bull bars getting bigger. I want to see consecutive bull bars. I want to see bull bars closing on their highs. I want to see more bull bars than bear bars. I want to see gaps. The close of the bar above the high of the prior bar. The close of the bar above the high of many prior bars. Same here. This close is above the high of maybe 20 or 30 bars. I want to see higher highs and higher lows. Higher lows, higher highs. An early bull channel. I want to see more bull bars. I want to see more bull bars. I want to see more bull bars. When I start to see signs that buying pressure is greater than selling pressure, I believe the odds begin to favor a bull breakout. Which is what we got. Here another trading range. And I'm assessing buying and selling pressure. We have five consecutive bull bars. Good for the bulls. However, look at what took place over here. No more consecutive bull bars. And the bars are getting very small. The bull bars are very small. And then now we have five consecutive bear bars. And here we have six consecutive bear bars. So the selling pressure is building. And look at the close of this bar. It's below the low of this bar. In fact, it's below the low of the past 40 bars. So it's a small breakout and it's following six or seven consecutive bear bars. And this is a possible lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout, lower high. Lower high major trend reversal. There's a left shoulder, head, right shoulder. So this lower high major trend reversal is also a head and shoulders top. That does not make it any more reliable. But traders commonly use the term head and shoulders top. And that's why I'm mentioning it. And this was the result of that accumulating selling pressure. Channels also have signs of buying and selling pressure. For example, obviously a strong bull breakout. Seven bull bars, many of them closing on their highs. And the bodies were getting smaller. And then they get bigger again. Smaller and then bigger again. Bull breakout, a spike. Then we start getting pullbacks. So a channel. Spike and channel, bull trend. When I look at the channel, I'm assessing selling pressure all the way up. And if there are signs of increasing selling pressure, then the channel might soon evolve into a trading range. Pullbacks and tight trading ranges. So there's some selling, right? We were going up. Now we're going sideways to down, sideways to down, sideways, a little bit down. There is some selling going on. Unlike here where there's virtually no selling. And then look at this. We've got two bear bars, decent size. And then we've got a rally here. And there's one push up, two pushes up, three pushes up. So it's possibly a wedge bear flag after this small bear breakout. And it's also potentially a lower high major trend reversal. A bull trend. Here's the trend line. We've got a bear breakout. And now we have a wedge lower high. And we did get a second leg down. Leg one, pull back leg two. And remember, channels usually evolve into trading ranges. Bull channels, 75% chance you're going to get a bear breakout. A break below the bottom of the trend line. Only 25% chance you're going to get a bull breakout. We've got a bear breakout. And then usually, even with a strong sell-off like that, a bull channel is usually followed by a trading range. Here, bull breakout. Pull back. And then we're starting to channel up. And within this bull channel, there are three consecutive bear bars closing on their lows. And another pretty good sized bear bar here. And you can think of this as possibly a wedge. One push up. Two pushes up. Maybe three pushes up here. Consecutive bear bars closing on their lows. The gaps between the close of the bar and the low of the prior bar. And we have a good bull bar here. But what followed it? A doji. A good bull bar here. What followed it? A bear doji. Good bull bar here. What followed it? A bear bar. So instead of a series of consecutive bull bars like we had here, now we're getting bull bars with bad follow through. And that means that the market probably will soon evolve into a trading range, which it did. So a bull spike in channel. And channel evolved into a trading range. In a bear trend, here we have a bear spike and then a channel. We have pullbacks to the start of a channel. I like to assess the selling pressure compared to the buying pressure. And I pay attention to signs of buying pressure because a channel, a bear channel has a 75% chance of a bull breakout. It could simply be sideways. It could be up. But in any case, a bear channel, I think of as a bull flag. I'm expecting a bull breakout, 75% chance. Only 25% chance of bear breakout. And I'm constantly assessing the buying pressure in a bear channel because it increases the chances that the channel will soon evolve into a trading range. Here we have a series of bull bars. And we've got some more bull bars here. We're getting tails below bars. So when the bar is trying to resume down, the bear trend is trying to resume down, bulls are buying and bears are scalping. Trying to get a bear bar and a traded up into the close. So bears are scalping. They're less confident the trend is going to go far. So instead of swing trading, more and more bears are scalping. Then I look at bear bars. Bear breakout. Bear breakout. But a bull bar for a follow through. Bear breakout. Bull bar. Bear breakout. Bull bar. This bar closed above the high of this bar. In fact, it closed above the high of many bars. That's a sign of strength. It closed above the high of 15 bars. So we have a bull breakout above the high of a bear channel. And above the high of a low two short. So we have a low one here, a low two here. Or you could say it's a double top bear flag, which is a large low two. We have a decent sell signal bar. But instead of going down, it reversed up and broke again above the high. Traders will buy at that high or just above. Many will simply buy the closed because it's a decent sized bull body. And it should not happen if the bears are still in control. And then you can put a stop just below here. You could put it down here. But if the bulls have taken control, the market should not trade below this low. So in other words, it's a major higher low, even though it's not all that convincing yet. So you can buy the close or you could wait for strong follow through and then start to buy closes. And every time there's a strong breakout, traders raise their stock to below the most recent higher low. Buy the close, even if you bought the worst close and the market started to reverse, it's still okay if you rely on your stock. Here, same thing. We got a good bull bar, a decent follow through bar, bull body. That's good. Traders will buy the close expecting higher prices. You can also buy bear closes because a bear close is an attempt to reverse the market. And we know the market became always in long and it's probably going higher. So traders will buy both bull closes and bear closes. They'll also buy below bars. So we've got a reversal attempt. Traders will assume the reversal attempt will fail. So they'll buy at the low of that bar. They'll buy at the low of every prior bar. In this video, I talked about buying and selling pressure within trading ranges. And I also talked about the importance of buying and selling pressure in channels. If there's a bull channel and it's starting to accumulate selling pressure, the bull channel will probably have a bear breakout and it will probably evolve into a trading range. On the other hand, if you have a bear channel and you're starting to get conspicuous buying pressure, you're probably soon going to get a breakout above the top of the channel. And the channel will probably evolve into a trading range. So I'm Bruce. Thank you for watching the Brooks training course. This is the second of two videos on buying and selling pressure. Welcome, I'm Bruce. I'm Bruce discriminant for the Red vontade now. Love you for sure. I Wide whobach has a picture. Now come to you on a books develop the blue button so we can put some rules.