 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on trading broad bear channels. Because it's a bear trend, bears will sell, but the market sometimes has strong enough reversals up so that bulls can sometimes make money buying. Also, broad bear channels often are always in log, but the rallies are bull legs in a bear trend. Broad bear channel, but a lot of the rallies are big enough for the bulls to make money either swing trading or scalping. The market is forming lower highs and the market is in a bear trend. Traders will look to sell reversals down. Even after a pullback this big, this is actually simply a wedge rally. One, two, three, and a double top, slightly lower high double top, below the top of the bear trend. Reversal up, but it looks like a bear leg in a trading range or a bear leg in a broad bear channel. Traders will therefore sell reversals down here or here. And then again, very strong rally, but unless it gets above prior significant lower highs, it's more likely that this is a bull leg in either a trading range or a bear channel. And therefore, traders will look to sell, especially a very big bar near the top of the channel or the top of the trading range. Traders will bet that it's a second leg trap. First leg is either here, pull back here. Other computers will see the first leg as this and then pause and second leg up. Trapping traders with the biggest bull bar at the top of the trading range and the top of a channel. Trapping traders into thinking it's becoming always in long. But the reality is there are far more bears looking for bars like this to come in and sell and overwhelm the weak bulls who are buying too high. If you sold in here, you're probably putting your stock up above the top of the bear trend. A double top, you can also call it a wedge. Three rallies. One, two, three. Even though the second and third rally are at the same price. Wedge bear flag and a lower high. Bear breakout, not very strong. Now we have a small double top here. A triangle. Traders will look to sell a reversal down below a good looking bear bar like that. Head and shoulders top bear flag. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Or you can simply call it a broad bear channel where you have a pretty strong rally but still above prior major lower highs. If you have a bear trend and they're starting to get fairly deep pullbacks, then it's probably a broad bear channel and not a tight bear channel. And if it's a broad bear channel, bulls will look to buy below prior lows. And some bears will start buying below prior lows to take profits. The bears start to sell rallies instead of breakouts to new lows. And then they take profits. They buy back their shorts once the market falls to a new low. So you get these strong bear breakouts that just fail because at a new low, the bears are buying back their shorts. Darning that the trend is strong enough to continue straight down. So they take profits at new lows. The bulls know the bears are doing that. So the bulls are buying new lows as well. And then the bears are looking to sell somewhere in the middle third of the prior leg down. And the bulls will take profits there because they know the reversals up are probably going to be minor. Here we have eight bars without a pullback and a lot of bull bars closing above their midpoints. Reasonably strong rally, but tight bear channel and therefore minor, which means it probably will lead to a trading range or a bear flag and a resumption of the bear trend. This is important. We have a double bottom and a breakout. We fell pretty far below the breakout point, either of these lows, but we rallied back above the breakout point. And that means this is a stairs pattern when you have pullbacks above breakout points. What's important to note is that bulls buying lows and scaling in lower are making money. Bulls are making money in a bear trend. That usually means the bear trend is weak. So you have to be thinking that it's probably a broad bear channel and not a tight bear channel. And once bulls see that, they'll start to look to buy at new lows and below prior lows. Not only did this pullback go above that low, we have a second leg up that went above this high. Two legs up and a higher high. Probably a trading range, but still a bull leg in either a trading range or a bear trend. It's important to note the strength of the rallies and the bulls, therefore, are confident that subsequent rallies will also be strong. They'll look to buy reversals up from new lows. The bears are disappointed by the size of these rallies. So are they going to be selling at the new lows? No, because they're afraid of another big rally and it might turn into a bull trend. Therefore, the bears stop selling at new lows and they buy back their shorts at new lows and look to sell rallies. Once bulls see that limit order bulls buying below prior lows can make money, in other words, the pullbacks are going above the breakout points, the bulls become more confident and they'll look to buy every new low and scale in lower. We broke below this low, but the bulls see the bulls who bought at that low and lower, or the bulls who simply bought lower, made money. And therefore, if the market falls below a prior low, here, here, or here, bulls will look to buy reversal up, betting that the market will come back above the breakout point and they'll make at least a scalp. Another new low. Bulls will buy either with a limit order at the prior low and scale in lower if need be, or they'll buy on a reversal up, especially in micro double bottom. We went down and then a doji bar down again and trying to go up micro double bottom here. The market broke to a new low. Well, the bulls are making money buying new lows. They're going to keep buying new lows. They'll place a limit order to buy at this low or at that low. And if necessary, they'll buy more lower. Some prefer stop entries and they'll buy on reversal up, especially if there's a micro double bottom and a second entry buy. The scale in bulls will take profits at their first entry price. So let's say they buy here and more one point lower and the market gets back to their first entry price. They'll exit at their first entry price, break even on their first buy and with a profit on their second. Or they may exit part of their trade there and then hold on to one of their positions, half of their position, hoping for a swing up. An example of bulls holding for a swing up. And if they see a reversal, a bear bar after a big breakout bar like that, and they look to the left and they see that this is not above everything. It's still either in a broad bear channel or a trading range. Both cases, they want to exit on a reversal down. And every instant traders are constantly trying to decide if they can structure a trade where the probability is 60% for the next few bars going up or down. We have a reversal. We went up, we went down, and this is probably a bear flag. Chances are we'll go sideways to down at least a little bit. Chances are 60% or so that we'll get at least a small second leg down after a parabolic wedge top. And therefore bears will sell a reversal down, especially below a bear bar. We went up on this bull bar and then we paused. We went up again on this bull bar and now we have a bear bar. About a 50% pullback, two small legs up. This is probably the first of two legs down because the channel is very tight. And bears sell looking for one more leg down. At this point, we have three consecutive bear bars closing on or near their lows. Strong enough sell off through here so that if we reverse up, we'll probably get at least one more leg down. The market now is sell the close. The either sell this close or that close, betting that the next reversal up will fail and probably become a bear flag. It's always higher probability to sell the closes after you see a strong breakout. And whenever you take a higher probability trade, your risk reward is always worse. Usually what it means is the stop is further away. So you're forced to risk more. If you sold here, this is what you got afterwards. But very tight channel, even though it's two legs down, it's still a very tight channel. So this reversal is probably minor. The bulls are hoping it's two legs down and will become a trading range or a bull trend. Leg one, pull back leg two. So a high one and then a high two here. Second entry over here. But very tight channel. More likely this is a minor reversal leading to either a trading range or a bear flag and a resumption of the bear trend. Any case, the bears are disappointed by the sell-off. And they'll look to take profits or to exit on a second reversal up. Here would be a third. It went above this bar. And then it went above this bear doji bar. Not a good enough reason to exit. But now we have another bull bar. So they'll exit here or they'll wait until they see two or three pretty good bull bars. And then they'll exit at the market. The bulls will buy. They know it's a tight bear channel. And the bears are disappointed by this bull bar and the buy signal triggering. And then a big tail here. And then another big bull bar here. And now another buy signal bar here. And therefore the bears are going to be buying even though it's a bear trend. It's low in a bear trend. And the selling is starting to become disappointing, the follow through. That increases the chances that the bear trend is not a strong bear trend. Instead that it is a broad bear channel. We have a nine bar bull micro channel at this point. And therefore the odds are we're going up at least a little bit more. And a lot of traders will look at that and say it's always in long. A lot of overlap among the bars. We're still only at the breakout point and not above any major lower high. So it still might be a bull leg in a trading range. However, the odds are we're going up at least a little bit more. So a lot of the computers will see the market as always in long at this point right here. That bull bar. You can either put your stop above this high thinking that it's fairly major. Or certainly above this high, the top of the entire bear leg. Broad bear channels often have legs that are strong enough to make the market always in long. But those are bull legs in a bear trend. Fairly tight channel. Pretty good rally here. Nine bar bull micro channel. And now a higher low major trend reversal. Forty percent chance if you buy here we're going to get a swing up. It's a reasonable buy. At some point the bulls give up. Very strong breakout here. Probably at least a small second leg sideways to up. And they have it. And then we're trying to reverse down from a double top. If you want you can call it three pushes up. One pull back two pull back three. And therefore it's basically a wedge top and a lower high. Bulls should take profits. Concluding that instead of the market entering a bull trend. It's probably a bull leg in a big trading range. The bears see a wedge lower high and a possible bear trend. And they know a lot of the bulls will give up after two pushes up and not much progress. The bears will sell. Either for a scalp taking a chance that it's going to be a trading range. Or for a swing hoping that we get a big second leg down. Leg one pull back leg two. A wedge higher low. Three reversals up. One, two, three. Testing the bottom of the bull breakout here. The double bottom bull flag. High or low. Reasonable buy. The bulls might get a swing up. Wedge bull flag. You can also call it a high one, high two. High one. And then the second leg down subdivides into two smaller legs. Doesn't matter, but it looks like a pullback from this breakout. What took place right here? We have five bear bars. Three of them. Decent sized bear bodies closing on their lows. A lot of traders see this as back two always in short. But it's confusing. The bulls have a wedge bull flag. They have an II buy. A second entry buy. One and then two. A lot of the bears who sold here are not going to like two legs down in a trading range. And they will get out. And the bulls will buy for a scalp or a swing. The bulls are hoping we're getting a series of higher lows and a bull trend. Disappointing reversal for the bulls. Now the market is confusing. A tight trading range inside of a trading range to here. Inside of a bigger trading range to here. Bears have a reason to sell. The bulls have reason to buy. But this is disappointing. And a lot of the traders will simply exit and wait. Whenever the market is in a fairly tight range like that. And you're not sure if it's always in long or short. I keep looking to the left to find the last time things were clear. And here we have five bear bars. Three of them pretty good bear bars. Also, it might be still in a broad bear channel. And therefore, even though it's in a tight range, it's probably slightly more likely to get a bear breakout than a bull reversal up. The bears are hoping for head and shoulders top, bear flag. A lot of the bulls will take profits below these bear bars. Bears might sell more for a swing than for a scalp. The reason why I say that is if they're selling below a bear bar here or a bear bar here, they're right at a prior low at the bottom of a tight range. Probably not enough reward for a scalp. So if you're taking a short this low down in a range, you'd probably have to be taking it for a swing. Next day, big gap down. We have a wedge bottom here. One, two, three. Inside of a bigger wedge bottom. One, two, three. And therefore, it's a nested wedge. That has a higher probability of a swing up. This is what I mean by the nested wedge. The third leg of the wedge is itself a smaller wedge. So there's a smaller wedge inside of a bigger wedge. That increases the chances of a reversal, at least a couple legs sideways to up. We also have an expanding triangle. We have a low that reversed up. A new low that reversed up even further. And now we have a third low that's trying to reverse up. And a second entry. Buy above that bar. This is a good reason for bears to get out of shorts. And bulls will take a chance and buy. If the bulls swung part of their position, they ended up with a good profit over the next couple days. Today and then the next day. The market's beginning to channel up, forming higher lows and higher highs in a pretty tight channel. And then at the end of the day, we got a pretty strong rally. The next day we gapped up. We had a pair of bear bars, but we have a small high two bull flag. High one above this bear bar and then a high two above that doji. Bulls will buy hoping for a resumption of the bull trend. Can you buy this close? Well, if you're willing to hold overnight, you certainly can. Most day traders are not going to buy the close at the end of the day. They'll wait to see what happens on the next day. But if you're willing to hold for a few days, then yes, it's by the close. Where do you take profits? Well, one way to do it is look for resistance. And a common resistance is a measured move target. We have a gap below this low and above that high. And therefore we might get a measured move up from this low to that low, which is right here. And you can see some bulls did take profits there. We have another gap. This pullback did not fall below that breakout point. And therefore this is a strong rally. And this gap might be a measuring gap leading to a measured move up. Maybe from the height of this bear leg we'll get a measured move up. We did. And that's one of the reasons why traders should focus on swing trading. swing trading. Higher, low, major trend reversal. The market went always in long. We broke above a high here. But then we started to reverse down. And it's still below this high and certainly still below that high. So some traders who sell here would just knock it out. They'd keep their stop either above this bar or above here, taking a chance that any reversal is minor and that will keep getting new lows. Possible second leg trap on a bear trend. One pullback two. Nested. One pullback two. Is it still always in short? Well if you're just looking at this chart at the close of this bar it's always in long. But if you're looking back over the past hundred bars you can say well maybe on a higher time frame chart it's still short and therefore maybe we'll get another leg down. So a lot of these bears will not get out even with this higher low major trend reversal and a strong bull breakout. Typically if I'm trading and I'm short for any reason I will get out. But I'm a day trader. I know that when I see this the odds are we're going up higher and when I see this breakout the odds are the first reversal down will be minor and that will come back up and test that close. Expanding triangle. Trader might get out if it is short down here especially a micro double bottom. If he did not get out here he would wait for a strong breakout and then conclude that the bulls have taken control. And here we have a couple pretty good bull bars. It's also the end of the day but a lot of the traders who bought up here are concluding now that we have an expanding triangle. We have a nested wedge and there's a broad bear channel probably soon evolving into a trading range or a bull trend. They're looking for reasons to get out especially by the end of the day. And consecutive or nearly consecutive bull bars with decent bodies enclosing on their highs. That's a good reason to get out. It's a bear trend. It's a broad bear trend and therefore not particularly strong. But bears should be looking to sell. And if the rallies up are strong enough bulls will look to buy as well. And sometimes the rallies are strong enough to make the market always end long at least briefly. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on trading broad bear channels.