 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on scalping. I'm going to be giving some very specific scalping examples in this video and I'll talk about how to manage the trades. The E-mini opened here with a big bear bar. Yesterday was a tight trading range, but we have a second consecutive bear bar. And for me, the market therefore is always in short, meaning that the first reversal up probably will be sold. I'm going to be talking about a lot of scalps in this video and most traders can sometimes spot scalps in time to take them. But if it distracts them from taking swing trades, they should stick to the swing trades. However, if they are able to take the trades and manage them well, then go ahead, take them. I've used the image of a little man holding out his arm with a little bag of money in it. As long as I'm able to grab all those little bags of money, they can add up to a big bag of money by the end of the day. A lot of times you'll realize that a scalp is setting up too late to take the trade, a few seconds late. And since every tick matters in a scalp, if you're late, it's better not to take the trade. But don't worry about it because most of your money will come from swing trading. Also, if you want to scalp, there'll be plenty of other scalps. On a typical day, there are at least 40 one point scalps. Again, if you spot it in time and you think you can manage it appropriately, go ahead and take it. Yesterday was a tight trading range and we opened here with a big bear bar and we have consecutive bear bars. The day is always in short. A lot of traders will place a limit order to sell at the high of this bar and look for a one point scalp. We have a tight trading range at the end of yesterday and we are reversing up a first time and a second time here. So it's a second entry buy at the bottom of a tight trading range. It's reasonable to buy looking for at least a bounce. This is a possible low of the day. It's a micro double bottom. The market went down on this bar and went up on this bar and went down on that bar. And now it's going up a second time. So a second failed breakout of the bottom of that tight trading range. And we have a bull bar. Not a great looking bull bar, but it's a bull bar and it's a second entry buy at the bottom of a trading range. The odds are it'll go up at least enough for a scalp. So traders will place a stop order to buy one tick above the high of that bull bar and they'll get filled here. And they'll put their stop just below. And they placed a limit order to exit with a one point profit right there. Their reward is smaller than their risk. And that means you have to be very good at determining probability. Probability has to be far greater than 60% to trade this. In this case, the probability might be 70 or 80% that you're going to make a profit. How do you know that? From experience. And that's one of the difficult things about scalping. The initial risk is often greater than your planned reward. And you need a very high probability to be profitable. The actual risk here, if you buy one tick above the high of this bar, your actual risk is one tick below. So you're risking about six ticks to make four ticks. And therefore, if you're right 70% of the time, you'll make money. The bear's got a reversal down. Now we have a very big outside up bar. But we're near the top of yesterday's tight trading range. And we've had many reversals already today. Up and down and up and then down and then up. This is a trading range market. If you think about this for a moment, let's say you want to buy above the high of this bar. You're buying toward the high of a tight trading range. And the reversal up is not all that strong. We have a good bull bar, but you're buying fairly high up in a range. Is the probability high for that? No, it's not. And look at the size of the bar. If you buy above the high of this bar, your stop is below the low of the bar. Your risk is great. So here you're thinking about buying above the high of this bar, risking a lot, with a low probability bet buying at the top of the trading range. Therefore, in fact, there probably are more sellers above the high of this bar than buyers. So should you be buying up here or should you be selling up here? You have a big bull outside up bar, but a trading range market. Traders were buying this bear close and this bear close and making money. If they bought this bear close and scaled in lower, or if they bought this bear close, they made money. The market reversed. If they sold this bull close, even though it's consecutive bull closes, they made money. Well, what's going to happen now? You have another big bull bar closing on its high near the top of the range. Probably it's not going to go up very far and there might be more sellers on the close of that bar and above its high than buyers. And therefore, an aggressive scalper will sell that close and put a stop up here above the top of those three bear bars. That is really not a great short and most traders should not take that trade. However, it did fall a point and the bears made their money. The bears who took this short probably would have been willing to scale in higher. Tight trading range so far on the day. For the bears, they have a reversal down and a pullback. And this is therefore a low one bear flag. But look where you are. You're at the bottom of a tight trading range that has lasted about 30 bars. And look at your sell signal bar. It has a big tail on the bottom. And what happened at this price level today? We went up. We went up again. We went up. We went up. We went up. This time you think it's going down? No. Especially with a bad sell signal bar like that. Therefore, there are probably more buyers at the low of this bar than sellers. And a bull scalper will place a limit order to buy at that low. He'll get filled here. He might put a stop below the bottom of this big bull bar. Because if the bulls are good enough for a scalp, they should not allow it to fall below the low of this bull bar. You place a limit order to get out with a one point profit and you get filled right there. Bulls starting to get a breakout here. You can call it a small double bottom high or low. This is the second reasonable attempt to reverse up from below that trading range. Reverse up here. Here's a reversal attempt. A second reversal attempt. The bears tried to make the reversal attempt fail. Look what they were met with. A bull bar. And they tried to get a small bear flag. Buyers below. Now we have a small double bottom up and up. Both bars closing near their high. We have the magnet of the top of this big bull bar. Bulls want to see what's there. The bears want to see what's there. And therefore, it's reasonable to buy above the high of this bull bar. We have a pair of good bull bars closing on their highs. We have a bull bar here closing on its high. We have a bull bar here closing near its high. And we have a double bottom high or low. It's above this low. It's reasonable to buy for a scalp right above the high of that bar. If the bulls aren't good, it should not fall below the double bottom. You can put your stop below the low of this bar or below the low of this bull bar. You place a limit order to get out with a one point scalp and you get filled there. What happens up here? Should you buy with a stop at the high of this bar? Betting that we'll get a breakout and a measured move up. You can call it a double bottom with this low or that low. You can call it simply a very good looking bull bar. I think the bulls need more to convince traders that they have taken control and that this is not now a double top. We have a small double bottom here. Maybe this is a double top. Maybe we break below here and go for a measured move down. Bulls need follow through. And until they get follow through, bears will bet the bulls will not get follow through. And therefore, whenever the bulls need one more bar, the bears will sell, betting that the bulls will not get that one more bar. For example, we have consecutive bull bars. The bulls are hoping that they get one more bar so that everyone believes they have taken control. Well, guess what? The bears are going to sell that close thinking that, huh, bulls made money buying bear closes today. Bears have been making money selling bull closes today. Well, I'm going to sell this bull close betting that the bulls will not get their one more bar. They sell that close and stop above the top of the initial sell off. Scalp out with one point profit. As soon as they get filled on their short at that close, they place a limit order to buy back the shorts with a one point profit. And they get filled right there. For the bears, they have a reversal down. If you want, you can think of it as a double top bear flag. Whenever you have a double top, I always think of it as a low two. Here's a low one. Here's a low two. But a fairly prominent tail, middle of a tight turning range, not a great short. However, we're still always in short. We had those consecutive big bear bars making the day always in short and the reversal up, reversal up, reversal up, reversal up. None of it has been enough to change it. So the market still is always in short. And the reversal up, reversal up, reversal up, reversal up. None of it has been enough to change it. An aggressive bear will place a stop order to sell below the low of that bar, taking a chance that we break below the neckline. Any of these bars is the neckline of this double top and start a swing down. I don't think this is a particularly great short, but it's a reasonable scalp, taking a chance that we'll test down. And the bears exit with a one point profit. The bulls have another double bottom, high or low attempt. But we now have three consecutive bear bars, and now we have a fourth bear bar breaking below the low of that double bottom. Because of the three consecutive bear bars, even with the double bottom, some bears will place a limit order to sell at the high of this bar. Arguing, okay, the bulls are thinking they have a double bottom, but we have three bear bars and we have a bear body on this bar. It's a low probability buy, therefore they'll sell this high and get filled right here as it went above the high of that bar. And a lot of these bears would sell more higher. They get out with a one point profit. For the bulls, we have a double bottom, this low and that low, and we're trying to reverse up. It's a small high two, high one, and then high two. But we're starting to get a fairly tight bear channel. You can buy with a stop above the high of this bull bar, but with four consecutive bear bars, I would not take the buy. I would wait. The character of the day is changing. We had three bear bars here. We only had two bull bars and two bull bars here. Now we're starting to get a series of bear bars. The bears might be gaining control. I'm not opposed to taking that buy. If you did take it, you get out on a stop below the low of the double bottom right here with a loss. Some traders instead would bet that the high two will fail. In general, I don't like to sell near the bottom of a tight trading range. Even though we have four consecutive bear bars, it's a second entry buy. It's a double bottom. I personally would rarely ever take that sell, even though it's a fairly tight bear channel. The logic behind taking it is we're in breakout mode. The market is probably forming either the high or low of the day. We are still always in short. The bulls never did enough to make it always in long. And the bears have a double top, lower high, and now four bear bars. Slightly more negative than positive. Traders will take that short. Certainly four, a swing down. Aggressive traders would take it for a scalp. Again, for me, that's one I would not take for a scalp. By going outside down, we have a failed high two buy. High one, high two. The bulls would put their stop down here. And we broke below the bottom of that high two bull flag. We might get a measured move down. We're also breaking below a double bottom here. And we're in breakout mode. This could be the start of a bear trend. You have trapped bulls who all morning long have been betting on an early low of the day. Now we're breaking below the low of this big bull reversal bar and this double bottom. Some bears will sell on a stop on the break below that double bottom. Others will sell the close of the bar, taking a chance that we're beginning a series of bear bars and that the bulls will give up. In general, by the end of the first hour and a half or so, there's a 90% chance the market has seen either the high or low of the day. And at this point, we're in breakout mode and we're breaking up below this double bottom. Probably this is the high of the day and therefore the range will probably double. And selling this close is reasonable. Certainly for a swing, some traders might scalp all or part. If they scalp, they'll place a loon order to get out one point below their entry and they get filled here. Now we have a bear breakout to a new low. A close below the low of the first 15 or 20 bars of the day. And now we have a second consecutive bear bar. Even though it has a fairly big tail, meaning this is probably not going to be a very strong bear trend, it's still a follow through bar after a bear breakout on a day that is in breakout mode. Therefore, the odds are we'll go lower, maybe at least a couple of legs, one pull back two. Traders will look to sell. Some traders will just sell closes. If you sell the close, your stop is above the top of the bear leg. You can sell the close and hold for a swing or you can take repeated sells. Sell the close scalp, sell the close scalp. If you sell that close, you can place a loon order to get out one point lower right here. But now you have another bear bar closing below its midpoint. It's another sell the close bar. We have a sell the close bear trend. After you exit at that blue box, you sell the next bear close right here. If you sold that close and then you saw this, what are you thinking? It reversed up before you made your one point profit. This is a disappointment bar. If you have a sell the close bear trend and then a pretty good bull bar, the bears will be disappointed. Is it a major reversal? No, it's probably a minor reversal. The channel down is very tight. It's reasonable to sell that close. If you do something reasonable and you manage your trade correctly, you're usually able to at least avoid a loss and usually make a profit. If you sell the close bear trend like this, the market immediately reverses up in a bull bar like that, usually you can sell more higher, like a couple points higher, expecting the market to come back down to this close. And then you can get a break even on this entry and with a profit on your higher entry. You can see what happened here. The bears who sold two points above this close got filled here and then the market came back down to their close. They can get our break even at their first entry and with two points profit on their second entry. You can also sell below the low of this bar for a low one bear flag. We broke to a new low of the day, three consecutive bear bars, and we have a bear bar closing on its low. If you took the short on this close and sold more two points higher, you get out here with two points profit there and break even here. Other bears would simply sell more below a bear bar. Usually if I take a short here, sell the close, I'm going to be selling more with a limit order because this low one short, the entry is usually not far enough above the first entry to make it worthwhile. If ever I'm scaling into a bear trend and I'm looking to take the second entry with a stop, I prefer to have my stop entry be at least two to three times the size of a scalp above my first. In other words, two to three points above the first, and this is too close to the first. Had I shorted this and did not sell more here, I would not have sold more here. I either would have gotten out break even or I would have held short, hoping that this is the start of a swing down. Bear breakout, probably at least one more leg down. Well, we got one more leg down and look what we have now. Another bull bar closing on its high. You can call it a micro double bottom or a small double bottom, a lower low double bottom. In any case, the bears who sold this close, what are they doing now? Are they selling more? No, they're giving up. They're giving up. This is a sign that the sell the clothes bears were sufficiently disappointed by this bar that they wanted to buy back their shorts when it got to around their clothes. Some of them held short briefly during this bar, but immediately afterwards, this is bears giving up. They were sufficiently disappointed by this. A whole bunch of them started buying back their shorts when it got back down through around that close. And this is bears buying and it's aggressive bulls buying as well, betting that the bears would give up. This is not a strong sell off. The bars are relatively small, prominent tails, a lot of trading range price action here. Disappointment for the sell the clothes bears here. A lot of the bears gave up and a lot of the bulls bought for a scalp up. You can also call it a wedge channel. One push down, reversal. Another push down, reversal. Push down, reversal. Different ways to look at it as a wedge. You can say this is the first push, second push, third push. This could be the first push on some computers. Second push, third push. Different computers see different things, but most computers see this as a weak bear trend. Probably a bear leg in what will become a trading range, which means we'll probably get a bull leg before long. We have a double top bear flag and we're also around a measured move down. It does not matter if you use this high or that high for the measured move projection. In either case, we're around that measured move target. Sndy got a double in the dollar. I gave some very specific scalping examples in this video. Again, most traders should focus on swing trades. However, if you spot a reasonable scalp and you think you can manage it correctly, go ahead. Take it. It's reasonable to do. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on scalping.