 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks training course. This is the first of five videos on wedges. In this video, I'm going to discuss what I mean by the term wedge. I use a broad definition to include just about any pattern that has three pushes, whether or not the pattern is convergent. This is a continuation of the list of reversal patterns that I've been discussing. And like all of the other reversal patterns, even wedges involve some type of trading range. For example, a final flag or after the wedge reverses is often a major trend reversal, which is usually part of a trading range. I always think of wedges as either a flag in a trend or as part of a reversal. For example, we have a pretty strong breakout here and we have a bull bar and then a second bull bar that led to a small reversal and then a third bull bar. This is a wedge bear flag. It does not matter that the beginning of the bear flag began before the bull trend ended. That's common for the market in transition from a trend into a trading range or a trend into an opposite trend for the transition to begin before the trend ends. Wedge bear flag. Bear flag is a pullback and that means chances are the bear trend will resume. The bear flag is a small trading range or a small bull trend. A breakout above a wedge bear flag is a reversal into a small bull trend. A wedge top is a reversal of a bull trend. The trend line and the trend channel line are converging. It's a convergent channel. We had a bull breakout above the channel and now we are reversing down. So a wedge top is a wedge reversal. A wedge bear flag is a pullback. Every bull channel is almost always a pullback. A bull channel is almost always a bear flag on a higher timeframe chart. And a bull channel, 75% chance you'll get a bear breakout either by going down or by going sideways. And then the market evolves into a trading range. And therefore a bull channel is ultimately a bull leg in what will become a trading range. A wedge is simply a triangle where the triangle is sloped upward or sloped downward. There are often different ways to draw wedges and wedges are often nested smaller ones inside of larger ones. We have a bull breakout, a pullback. Second bull breakout, pullback. And then a third rally and a reversal down. Some computers see the wedge as one, two, three. Other traders see it as a larger wedge. One and then two and maybe three. It doesn't matter as long as you understand what's going on. The market keeps trying to break to the upside and failing. You could say we have a strong bull trend here and then a bear breakout. I did not draw the trend line. And traders will look for a resumption of the bull trend to fail. In this particular case, this is a wedge higher high major trend reversal. This, on the other hand, is a pullback in a bull trend. It's a wedge bull flag. You expect the market to resume up. Here, you expect the market to reverse down. This is a small bear trend within a larger bull trend. A triangle that's sloped upward. One, two, three. Three pushes up in a trading range. It's a triangle. It's sloped upward, so I use the term wedge. Convergent lines. You can call it a bull channel or you can call it a wedge. A rising wedge is a potential top. A bull channel, a wedge bull channel, is usually a bear flag. The odds are you get a bear breakout. There's overlap here. The breakout above this high, pull back below the high. The breakout above this high, pull back. The breakout above this high, pull back. When you have a wedge channel where there's overlap, there's higher probability that you'll get the bear breakout. We're trying to get a bull breakout above the top of a bull channel. 75% chance that fails within about 5 bars. And you get a test of the bottom of the channel. That's not saying much when the bottom of the channel is so close. But given the entire picture, the bears might be able to get a test to the bottom of the channel or even possibly a bear trend. Here we have a reversal bar, a close below the midpoint. It's only a doji, but it is a reversal bar and it's a reasonable sell. Traders will sell with a stop just below the low of that bar and get filled here. Pretty good looking entry bar for the bears and very good looking follow through. This bar is even bigger than that bar and it's closing on its low. It looks like the market's going lower. A series of consecutive bear bars closing on their lows. Strong breakout, probably at least some kind of a measured move down. The goal is after a wedge top, a swing down. 10 bars, 2 legs as a minimum reasonable goal. This could be the first leg and then a small pullback, second leg. Or this entire move down might be the first leg. And then the market might get a larger pullback and a larger second leg. Remember earlier I said there were different ways to draw this wedge. Some computers would say the top of this breakout is the first push and maybe this is the second. Or they might say first, second, third and fourth push. They may say the wedge channel has four pushes up. Nested wedge, I view this as a large first push up, a pullback, second push here and then pullback. And then the third push subdivides. So it's a nested wedge, a smaller wedge. Within a larger wedge, that has a higher probability of leading to a reversal. A wedge top, it's a climax. And like all climaxes, it usually leads to at least a pullback or at least a pause in the buying. Climaxes can last a long time. Series of bull bars here, five bull bars. Climactic move here. A series of strong bull bars here. The rallies within a wedge top are often strong. Strong enough often to be a buy the close rally. Traders will buy closes, confident that the market will go at least a little higher. The same with here. It's a buy the close rally. And here as well, even though the bars are small through here, these are buy the close rallies. At this point, look at the pullbacks. Only two bars down here. One bar here. One bar here. Two bars here. We have a part of the large wedge that is also a small pullback bull trend. Which you can call a short squeeze. The shorts are getting squeezed. The bears who keep selling reversals are being forced to buy back their shorts by bulls buying below the lows of the bars. More buying than selling. A small pullback bull trend is also climactic and unsustainable. And therefore, it's appropriate that it's occurring within a wedge, which is usually made up of a series of climaxes. Small pullback bull trend. It's a FOMO trend. Fear of missing out. The bulls are buying because of momentum rather than because of fundamentals. They're not buying up here because it's cheap. They're buying up here because the market's going up and they think it will continue up because the pullbacks are small. FOMO trades, fear of missing out trades, are crowded trades. Everyone's long and once traders start to take profits, everyone exits in a panic. It just takes a couple bars here to make all of the traders who bought during the last 10 bars now holding losing positions. And they're going to be very quick to get out. That happens all the time with crowded trades. When too many traders are long, they're going to be quick to get out. They know they're buying based on momentum. And as soon as the momentum ends, everybody is going to be quick to exit. We have a bear breakout. First push down. Second push down. Third push down. You can call this a first push. You can call this. You can say this is a wedge. One, two, three. And the bottom did not lead to much of a reversal. You can call this a wedge. Bear trends are always forming wedge bottoms. Bolt trends are always forming wedge tops. This is a wedge because it's a bear channel. Wedge bottom. It's a bear channel and the lines are converging. We're getting overlap. If you're looking for a wedge bottom, you want overlap. You want the pullback from the second leg to go above the low of the first leg. That increases the chances that if you start to get a reversal, it'll be a successful reversal. You can draw a line. You can draw a channel line. We have a reversal up. Reversal up. You can draw a line. And here we're breaking below the line and we're reversing up. They'll break up below the bottom of the bear channel. That's good for the bulls. Strong reversal bar. A little bit of a micro double bottom. This bar went down and up. And then we went down here and then up here. Good for the bulls. Bulls will buy above the high of that bull bar or the high of this pullback bar. The goal of the reversal is 10 bars, two legs. Approximately. It could be a lot more. Usually not much less. So first leg up, pullback, second leg. Or a complex first leg up, pullback, second leg. Another goal in a wedge reversal is a test of the top of the channel. Either here or here. And ultimately we reached both. Whenever you have a sell climax like this and then a reversal, one reasonable target is to get just a little bit above that high, which we got over here. The goal of every market is to find a price that will attract the most trading. A fair price. A price that the bulls find good for buying, the bears find good for selling. And to find that fair price, it's constantly changing. There's constant information coming into the market. Every fair price is constantly changing. The market usually has to go too far one way to find out how far, far enough is. And that's what happens with a wedge bottom. The market's probing for a bottom. And then at some point decides it has gone too far. And the fair price is probably higher. So it reverses up and starts probing in the opposite direction. You see three pushes down and the legs down are getting smaller. Plus you see overlap. The pullback from the second leg goes above the low of the first leg. There's less interest in lower prices. The market sees the buying pressure. They see that the bulls who buy at this low can make money. They assume the bulls who buy at this low will make money. Less interest in buying lower. The reversal attempts are coming after fewer bars. The bears are deciding that this price is too low to sell. They only want to sell higher. And the bulls believe that the market fell too low and that it's a good value. And they start buying. They start buying below bars. And then they're starting to buy with stops on reversals up. Confident that we've gone too far down. Both bulls and bears buy. The result is a reversal. Usually when you get a reversal, you get a couple legs up. Because you get trapped bulls and bears. You have bulls who did not buy initially. They're trapped out. They're hoping for any kind of a pullback to buy. That results in the second leg up. And you have bears who did not get out on the reversal up. And then they see this and they decide, okay, it's going higher. And they look for any reversal down so they can buy back their shorts with a smaller loss. The result is you have bears trapped into shorts and they're looking to get out. And they buy. You have bulls trapped out of a long. They're hoping for any kind of a pullback. And they buy. The result is a second leg up. We're selling off here. Not all that strong. Big bear bar, small bear bar. A pair of bear bars, bull bar. Bear bar, doji. This looks like a bear leg in what will become a trading range. You have to think that we have a little bit of overlap here. So a negative gap, negative gap here. It's also a small pullback bear trend. And that has an element of long liquidation. Bulls keep buying. They decide they bought too soon. They have to sell. They have to liquidate. And that's happening repeatedly here. A tight channel. A small pullback bear trend. That is climactic. Here it has a series of small cell climaxes. A wedge bottom usually has different types of cell climaxes within it. Here we have a five bar cell to close type of cell climax. These bear trends can last a long time. And they can create a pain trade. Bulls see what they believe is a weak, broad, bear trend. And they keep buying. However, they keep buying and they keep losing. And they start to feel a lot of pain. A pain trade is a low probability event. And that just goes on a long, long time. You look at it and say, wait a minute. How can this suddenly be getting so much stronger when we had bad follow through all through here? The bulls see this reversal up. They start assuming we'll get a major trend reversal. Yet the market keeps going down. So the bulls who are buying are experiencing a lot of pain. And pain trades usually have at least two legs. One pullback, two. Sell the close. Sell the close. It's a FOMO trade. Fear of missing out. The bears sell not because the market is expensive. They sell because it's going down. And they believe it will go down at least for a small second leg. And the result is they're not selling because of fundamentals. They're not selling because the market's expensive. They're selling based on momentum. And as soon as the momentum stops, everyone is trapped into shorts and they suddenly give up. It's a crowded trade. Too many traders short. And once the momentum down ends, the bears buy back in a panic. Crowded trades often lead to sharp reversals. The bears give up. And when you get these sell climaxes, the trades are usually crowded. Too many traders short. And the way you can see it's a wedge. Remember, a wedge is simply a triangle that is sloped up or down. And a triangle has three pushes up or down. As soon as I see three pushes here up, one pullback two, pullback three, I think this might be a wedge top. And higher probability of a reversal if the lines are converging as they are here. There are always multiple ways to draw patterns. I'm picking this. Some computers will say this is the first push, second push, third push. Here we have three pushes up. One, two, three. It's a triangle. And since it's mostly horizontal, traders would refer to this as a triangle rather than a wedge. There's also a bear trend, bull breakout, high or low, major trend reversal. And a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. Traders buy for the reversal up. You can also call it a head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, and then right shoulder. And the right shoulder formed a double bottom. If you have a channel, you have a pair of lines. If they're sloped up, it's a wedge. And it can be a bear flag and a bear trend. Or it can be a top and a bull trend. Here we have a wedge bottom. Does not look like a wedge, but it is. We have three pushes down. One, pull back two, pull back three. A small double bottom created the first two pushes. And then the third push here. Again, different computers use different reversals to create the lines. Some computers will say the wedge began here. Others will use the pink lines and say the wedge began here. Some will say we had a wedge top here. One, two, three. It tried to reverse down and failed. And then we broke to the upside. And the breakout above the wedge is failing. Another way to draw this wedge bottom. One, two, three. Whenever you have a wedge, you assume there's going to be a 75% chance that you'll get a breakout in the opposite direction. A wedge bear flag, you expect a reversal down. A wedge top, you expect a reversal down. Wedge bottom, a downward sloping wedge, you assume you get an upside breakout. A rising wedge, 75% chance you'll get a break below the bottom of the wedge, either by going sideways or by going down. Whenever I see a bull trend, whether or not it's a wedge, if it's in a channel like this, I think of it as a bear flag because I know the odds are there will be a bear breakout either into a bear trend or into a trading range. A falling wedge, a bear channel, 75% chance there's going to be a bull breakout. A triangle, 50% chance you'll get a downside breakout, 50% chance you'll get an upside breakout. 50% chance the first breakout will reverse. We have a triangle, we have a bear breakout, and it reversed. Is this a wedge top or a triangle? This high is slightly above that. This high is slightly above that. We have three pushes up. However, the pattern is mostly triangle. What do you call it? A wedge or a triangle? Doesn't matter. The forces are the same. Three pushes up. And a channel, conversion, 75% chance. In general, if it's a wedge, 75% chance you'll get a successful bear breakout. The flatter it is, the more it's a triangle, 50% chance you get the downside breakout, 50% chance you get the upside breakout. The bull is trying to get an upside breakout, and we see a decent sell signal bar. It's a reasonable short right below the low of that bear bar, betting on a failed breakout above a triangle or a failed breakout above a wedge. We're breaking below the bottom of the pattern. Is this a failed breakout? We're trying to reverse up, trying to reverse up. Well, it is. However, it's also five consecutive bear bars. Chances are there are sellers above and we'll get at least one small leg down. The bears, therefore, see this as the start of that second leg down, and they see this as a bear flag. They see the whole thing as a bear flag. We have a bear bar, bad follow through after the bull breakout. Traders will sell just below the low of that bar, and they'll get filled on this bar. Is this really a failed breakout below the bottom of the wedge? Well, I think it's more of a pullback than a failed breakout. We did not get above the top of the triangle or the top of the wedge. This is more likely a pullback from this five consecutive bear bar breakout. Wedges are very common and they're present on all charts, but they're rarely perfect. In fact, most of them don't look like wedges at all. Here we have a wedge bear flag. We can draw a line down here. We can draw a line here. You can say, wait a minute, there are only two pushes. One, two. But yes. However, there's a double bottom. We tried to go up here. We tried to go up again. We have two reversals up. One and then two. That means two pushes down. One and then this little bear bar, two. And this is a third push down. When you have a double bottom and a breakout below it, that is a type of a wedge. Bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, bull bar. And third push down here. A wedge bull flag. A wedge pullback after a strong bull breakout. If you want, you can call it a triangle and say the first push down was here. Which means this strong bull bar, in fact, was part of the pullback from this initial breakout. As strong as this is, some computers see this bull bar as part of the triangle, the pullback from this initial breakout. Three pushes down. Bear breakout. First push. And then a second push. And a third push. Not really converging lines. But still, I think of it as a wedge bottom. And I look for a bull breakout. Wedge top. You can say, well, what are you talking about wedge top? You got one push, maybe first push here. And then, are you calling this a second push and this a third push? Yes. This is a breakout. And therefore, it's a push. And then we have a second push here and a tail. Third push here. This is a small wedge nested within a larger wedge. This is the first push. Other computers will say, that's the first push. In any case, it's a bull channel with slightly convergent lines. I think of it as a small wedge top. And on a smaller timeframe chart, it might be a very good looking wedge top. We broke below the bull channel. Might get a second leg down. And we rallied up with three or four pushes. One, two, three, and four. This is a wedge bear flag. And we got a small second leg down. Leg one, pull back, leg two. Very tight bull channel. Not convergent lines. But a series of biclimaxes. One, two, three. And then two. And then pull back and three. On a smaller timeframe chart, this is probably a wedge. You could say this is the first push, second push, third push. Doesn't matter. You have two or three pushes in a fairly tight channel. I normally would not call that a wedge. However, you can think of it as a wedge. At least an inferred wedge on a smaller timeframe chart. You expect a bear breakout. You don't necessarily expect a big bear swing like that. But sometimes you get it. Maybe this is the first push, second push. Maybe first push, second push here. And then third push there. Different computers look at it differently. In this video, I talked about what I mean when I use the term wedge. Basically, I mean any pattern that has three pushes. It's more reliable than the other. If you want to go back, you can see the other thing. You can see the other drag button on the other side. And if you want to go back and share it with the other side. And you can see the other drag button on the other side. push, second push, maybe first push, second push here, and then third push there. Different computers look at it differently. In this video, I talked about what I mean when I use the term wedge. Basically, I mean any pattern that has three pushes. It's more reliable if the three pushes are in a channel that is converging. However, any three push pattern is a variation of a wedge. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of five videos on wedges. This is the first time I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks.