 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading breakouts. I want to emphasize the importance of using swing stops. At some point, a breakout has pullbacks and it then enters a channel. Once it enters the channel, you trade it differently. A breakout often follows a trap, a move that you think is good and then the market reverses and goes the opposite way. Sometimes there's an advantage to entering on a smaller timeframe. You can reduce your risk. Most traders should stick with a single timeframe. Very strong bull breakout. We have two small pushes down. Leg one. Bull tried to resume. That's the high one buy. And then a second leg down. And now a decent bull inside bar for a buy signal bar. A test of the breakout point. It's a good high two bull flag and it's a reasonable place to buy. You have a decent buy setup. A strong buy signal bar. It's reasonable to put your stop just below the low of the pullback. However, if you want a higher probability, you have to use a wider stop. Like maybe below the bottom of the breakout or below the bottom of the entire bull trend. If you think about it, this could easily have a third push down. One. Pull back. Two. Pull back. Three. And become a wedge bull flag. And therefore, the probability using this stop is not necessarily as high as it could be. A better stop is here or here. Because you're buying a high two bull flag, the first pullback and a strong bull trend, and you have a good buy signal bar, the probability is high that you're going to make money. And when that's the case, you can take profits at one times your actual risk. Whenever the probability of making money is 60% or higher, the trader's equation is positive if you simply take profits at one times your actual risk. Here, if you bought above the high of this bar, you get filled here. Your actual risk is to just below the low of your entry bar, and it's only two ticks. Theoretically, since the probability of making money is high, you could exit with only two ticks profit, and you would have a positive trader's equation. If you took that trade a hundred times, and you managed it properly, and placed your orders correctly, you would end up with a profit. A high probability of making a profit. High probability. It's always mathematically acceptable to take profits at one times your actual risk. As I discussed in other videos, the minimum scalp in the E-mini is four ticks. You should never be going for a profit of less than four ticks, which is two times your actual risk. The problem with taking a profit that's too small is you have to be perfect, and you have to be perfect all the time, because small mistakes, even infrequent mistakes, can erase many profitable trades when the profit is small. I want to say one thing about going for something that's mathematically acceptable. Just because it meets the minimum requirements for a positive trader's equation does not mean that it's the best thing to do. There are very few things in life where choosing to go for the minimum is the right choice. There's almost always a better choice. And when you have a strong bull trend like this, the breakout is ten points or more tall, going for a one point scalp is probably a bad choice. You're probably going to get a rally that's equal to a measured move, maybe based upon the height of the bodies here, or maybe based upon the height of the bull leg. Probably means 60%. So 60% chance the market's going up here. Does it make sense to take a one point profit and exit right here? Of course not. The open of the first bar of the breakout, the close of the second bar of the breakout, 60% chance the market is going to reach there before it gets here. And therefore exiting with one point is a bad decision. You have a 60% chance of making many times more points. If you have a limit order to take partial or full profits at this measured move target, and it does not go above the target, and you do not get filled, you can always take profits on the reversal down below the low of that bar, or below the low of a bear bar here. Or a second reversal down. First reversal down here, bull trend resumes, and then we have another bear bar here. That's another logical place to take profits. However, when the trend is this strong, chances are it's going to go higher still. Let's say you bought here, and you exited here on the first reversal down. You'd say, oh, that's five points profit. And a scalp is one or two points. A swing is four or more points. In this particular case, I would call that a scalp, even though it's five points. The day's range is fairly big. You're exiting right after a very strong breakout. The odds are high. We're going to get a second leg up. You're exiting before there's even a single pullback. I don't care if you call it a scalp or a swing. In my mind, if you're exiting after a very strong breakout on the first minor pullback, that's scalping type of trading. Let's say you happen to buy the close up here. You may have bought here and taken profits. You may have bought here and maybe you're buying more. But let's say you buy this close for any reason. Your stop should always be below the bottom of the most recent strong bull leg. We have a strong breakout to a new high. This is a major higher low. As long as the market does not pull back below that low, the premise of a bull trend is still valid. And therefore, if you're buying this, believing you're in a bull trend, your stop goes here. You're only wrong if it gets below this low. If it is in a bull trend, it will not get below that low. There might be a deep pullback. But if there is, chances are the market will bounce back to this level before it gets below that low. If you have that deep pullback, instead of a bull trend, you'll have a trading range. If you do get the deep pullback, a lot of traders will buy more on the resumption back up. Let's say you buy that close and you're confident that the pullbacks will be small after such a strong breakout here and here. You're not going to be able to buy much lower. Some bulls would buy maybe a couple points below that close, betting at a minimum that it will get back to that close. Some bulls, the bull scalpers, would exit. They buy here. They buy more two points lower. It has to get above this close to get out break even on their first entry and with two points profit on their second entry. And that's what happened right here. And you can see the selling at that high close. The market's clearly still always in long, even after the spare bar. And therefore, swing traders would not exit. They would continue to hold long. A pullback is a pause in a bull trend. It usually means that the high of the bar is below the high of the prior bar, or the low of the bar is below the low of the prior bar. But that's not always the case. For example, this is a pullback in the bull trend as well. The market went up and it went down. So a doji bar. And here we have an inside bar. That's also a pause in this bull trend. A bare body, even if the market is still going up, is another pause in a bull trend. Those are all pullbacks on lower time frames. So a little bit more. I mentioned a moment ago that if a market starts to behave like it's in a channel, you have to trade it like a channel. And that is somewhat different from trading it when it's in a breakout. A trend is made up of a couple parts. There's a strong breakout. Here we have a second strong breakout. And then you get a pullback. And then the market starts to channel up in a weaker bull trend. Ultimately, it transitions into a trading range. Breakout. A very strong bull trend. Here we have a second strong breakout. And then a channel follows a pullback. And it's still a bull trend. This channel is very tight. On a higher time frame chart, it would be a breakout as well. It would look like this maybe on a 15 minute chart. As soon as there's a pullback, the channel phase has begun. Here, instead of a channel, we got another breakout. We have a pullback here. And now we have a channel. We no longer have consecutive big bull trend bars. We have pullbacks every few bars. We have bare bodies. We have bars with tails on top. That is a weaker bull trend. It's still a pretty strong bull trend, but it's certainly less strong than a bull trend. Certainly less strong than this or this, where you have a series of bull bars closing on their highs. And very little overlap between the bars. And the tails on tops of the bars are small. It's important to watch the breakout phase. You want to see when you think it has ended and has entered a channel. Because once it has entered a channel, you trade it a little bit differently. Again, instead of consecutive big bull trend bars closing on their highs with very little overlap, like this, we're getting smaller bars, smaller bodies, the tails on top are becoming more prominent. And we're also getting several bare bars. Pullbacks are coming every few bars instead of no pullbacks at all right here. You can see the videos on trading tight channels and trading broad channels to get more information about channels. This video is about trading breakouts. Another thing that you'll notice in channels is bulls start to take profits at prior highs. They start to sell at prior highs. They buy pullbacks instead of at prior highs. Here, they're buying all the way up, including at the highs. Here, bulls are starting to take profits at every new high, so you're getting a pullback. In addition, the bears are starting to sell prior highs scaling in higher, betting that the market will pullback enough for them to make a profitable scalp. That's an important sign that a channel is transitioning into a trading range. We do have a bull channel, and it did transition into a trading range for about 30 bars. There was ultimately bull trend resumption, but it was in a pretty tight range for about 30 bars. Bears who sold at this high, or sold above this bar, or sold above this bar, were able to scalp out with one or two point profit down here. Therefore, limit order bears, bears selling above bars, are beginning to make money, and that usually leads to a trading range, which we have over here for about 30 bars. When the bears first sell, they use wide stops, maybe a measured move up, based upon this rally, way up here. They're never planning to let that stop be hit, but that's their initial catastrophic stop. They sell, and they sell more higher. They sell at this high, and maybe sell one or two points higher. Or, instead of selling at this high, they start selling one or two points higher, looking for a one or two point scalp. They're looking for quick profits. As the bull trend weakens, as it matures, it becomes weaker and transitions more into a trading range, it's important to notice if bears entering with stops can now make money. For example, here, maybe a little final flag, a bear bar closing on its low. Some bears might short that on a stop below that low. And, if they're scalping, they only need one point. This did fall far enough for them to make a one point scalp. And that is further evidence that the bull trend is weakening. Initially, the bears can only make a profit by selling with limit orders above bars. If they start making money with stops selling below bars, that requires the market to fall even further. That is a sign that the bull trend is weakening even further. Even though we ended up with a channel all day, spike, pullback channel, this is probably soon going to transition into a bigger trading range. We don't know that. We don't see what tomorrow looks like. But, we're starting to get trading range price action. And, you have to assume the market will become increasingly two-sided as this trend progresses. When the market is rallying like this, it's buy the close. Traders are buying strong bull closes, or they're simply buying at the market. However, when you're starting to get a lot of trading range price action, bulls are no longer willing to buy at the close of bars. Instead, they look to buy pullbacks. They can buy on a reversal up, a resumption of the bull trend, like above this bull bar. You can call this a bull flag, a bear channel, bull flag, a wedge, bull flag, three pushes down, one or one, and then two, and then three. Decent looking buy signal bar. They also buy with limit orders below bars, like below this low or below this bar, betting that the bear reversal attempts will fail. In any case, instead of buying at new highs and at the market as the market's going up, they're beginning to buy more at pullbacks. And they're starting to take profits when the market gets up near the prior high. Further evidence that the channel is weakening and beginning to have more trading range price action. It's becoming difficult for the bulls to make money and difficult for them to make much money. For example, if they bought above this bar and got filled here, somewhere in here, they're getting bad follow through dojis at the new high. And therefore, the bulls will take quicker profits like a one point profit or a two point profit. They're less willing to swing and they're scalping a bigger part of their position. Breakouts sometimes follow a trap. So sometimes the market starts to do something and then quickly reverses and does the opposite of what you think it will do. Some traders get trapped into doing the wrong thing. We have a bear trend. We're starting to get some good buying pressure and good bull bars. Maybe a wedge, one, two, three. And we have a double top bear flag. The market rallied for about eight or ten bars. Maybe a strong enough minor reversal so that the next reversal up will be major. The context is getting good for a reversal up. We're also at the bottom of the bull trend. So a possible big double bottom. Wedge bottom. The bear trend reversal. Above the bottom of this strong rally. Big tails on the bottoms of bars. Two bar reversals. So down and then up. Down and then up. We're getting buying as the market's trying to go down. The bears have a double top bear flag here. A low two. Low one. Low two. And it's reversing up. So it looks like it's failing. Is this a higher low major trend reversal? Well, when I look at that, I probably would call it minor. We went up for about eight bars or so. But the leg down was only three bars. Normally, you need more trend resumption down before you'll get a trend reversal up. We have a double bottom higher low here. Some bulls will buy this and take a chance that it will turn into a major reversal. Maybe test the top of this wedge. We don't know yet if this is a big minor reversal or a small major reversal. It's a reasonable buy. The reward maybe testing up here is more than twice the risk. The probability might be 40%. Now, what do you do? We have a strong bear bar. A low two short. Low one. Low two. We have a double top here. So a bigger low one. Low two. This is a good setup for the bears. They have a double top bear flag. This high and that high. The first high is actually a double top itself. And they have a good looking sell signal bar. And it's a low two here. Low one. Low two. And a double top. So it's a bigger low one. Low two. Maybe it will fall below the neckline of the double top. Two tops. Neckline down here. For a measured move. Low two. Low two. Strong sell setup. Not a particularly strong buy setup. Bulls will exit below that bear bar. The market is still always in short. The bulls have not yet done enough to convince traders that they have taken control. And therefore the bears are still in control. These bulls who bought here have a low two and a bear trend with a strong sell signal bar. They should get out below that bear bar. Trading range may be about 15 bars here. If you want you can call this whole thing a trading range. Every bar that gets added to it reduces the probability for the bears. Reduces the probability of trend resumption down. Bear trend trading range. Trend resumption down. And it increases the probability of trend reversal up. It's still better than 50-50 for the bears. The bulls have not yet done enough. But the probability is getting close. What's the force behind this strong sell signal bar? Well, if you think about it. It's good for the bulls to create a strong sell signal bar. And prevent the sell from triggering. And why is that? Because if the bulls create a strong sell signal bar by selling. Right? Their computers can sell. And make sure this bar closes on its low. They're creating a strong sell signal bar. Everyone knows that most bulls who bought here will get out below that low. If they can create a strong sell signal bar. And prevent the sell from triggering. That would be a sign of strong bulls. It's to their advantage to demonstrate strength. And one way to demonstrate strength would be to prevent a strong sell setup from ever triggering. Preventing the market from falling below that strong bear bar. So what happens here? We have a strong sell setup with a good sell signal bar. Everybody knows the bulls will get out below that bar. And the bears will sell below that bar. But what happens if it does not go below that bar? That is a sign that the bears are not strong. They have a great sell setup and they could not trigger it. The bulls would get out below that bar. Yet the bulls were able to prevent the market from falling below the low of that bar. That is a sign that the bears are not strong. They have a great sell setup and they could not trigger it. The bulls would get out below that bar. Yet the bulls were able to prevent the market from falling below that bar. And therefore the bulls did something to prove that they're strong. That is a sign that the bears are not strong. They have a great sell setup and they could not trigger it. The bulls would get out below that bar, yet the bulls were able to prevent the market from falling below the low of that bar. And therefore, the bulls did something to prove that they're strong. The market got down to the low of that bar on the next bar, but not below. The bulls prevented the bears from triggering a sell that would have flushed all the bulls out. Instead, the market went up and the bears who front ran the signal, the bears who sold, for example, at the close of this bear bar, got trapped into selling what turned out to be a bear trap. The bulls who did not yet buy, they'll buy above the high of this strong bear bar, seeing that the bears are going to panic out. They were selling trying to create a strong bear flag, a double top bear flag, expecting traders to sell more to trigger the sell by going below that bear bar. And instead, it went above the high of the bear bar and the bears are giving up. Because the bears are giving up, it's reasonable for the bulls to buy as well. So if the bulls did not buy here or here, or if they did not buy on that bear close, a lot of bulls will start buying above bars, like above the bear bar or above this fullback bar. The bears had a double top bear flag. They were expecting a measured move down, maybe based upon the height of the trading range, maybe from the double top to the neckline down. If you get a bull breakout above a double top, instead of getting a measured move down, you have to be thinking about a possible measured move up. And when the market gets there, it's very common for the bulls to take some profits. And that creates a pullback. It's also a test of the top of this wedge bottom. And that's another location where bulls will take profits. And aggressive bears will start selling, at least for a scalp. Let's take a look up here. We're in a bull trend, and we have a pullback. Is it a bear trend at this point? No, it's about a 50% pullback from this bull breakout. And the bulls are trying to get a high one, a high two. A bear breakout, maybe a small second leg down here. So another high one, high two. It's still a bull flag. It's reasonable to take the buy here for the failed bear breakout, or take the buy here, a high two buy, second entry buy. What else is going on here? Well, it's more or less an endless pullback. The channel down is fairly tight. It could go on a lot further. And it's a third push up. One, two, three. I have it drawn connecting the highs of the first and third push. It does not matter that the second push is above. And it's also a bull breakout of a triangle. We have a triangle here, three pushes down. One, two, three. Bull breakouts of triangles. Triangles are often final flags. And therefore, you have to be thinking that this bull breakout might be the final leg up, and we may pull back into this triangle. Also, the channel down is fairly tight. The pullback back up is only one bar. It's therefore possible that this is an endless pullback from a bull breakout. An endless pullback after it goes about 10 bars. If you start to see a bear breakout, the bulls are giving up. The bears are selling. And you're probably going to get a measure moved down. We have a bear breakout bar below a high two bull flag. And we have a bear follow-through bar. A lot of bears will sell the close to that follow-through bar. And you can see what happened. By the bears creating this breakout, they're trapping bulls into a loss. The bulls who bought up here are giving up. This series of bear bars is a give-up collection of bars. The bears are making the bulls give up. The bulls are now trapped into a losing trade. They need to get out to reduce their losses. And they're selling here. Some bears will take this early sell on the follow-through bar. Other bears will wait until we have a very clear and strong bear breakout. And then sell. Higher probability of making money if you sell after a strong bear breakout. However, your stop is further away. And that's always the trade-off. If you want the higher probability entry, once the market's clearly going to have at least a small second leg, your stop is always going to be further away. And you have less profit remaining in the trade. Therefore, greater risk, smaller profit, worse risk-reward. That's always going to be the case whenever you take the higher probability trade. We have a bull trend, fairly tight bull channel. And we have a pullback here. A bull inside bar. This blow is a little bit below that low, so it's not really an inside bar. But it's a bull bar pulling back. It's high as below the high of the prior bar. It's a reasonable buy above the high of that bar. So let's say you took that buy. Where's your stop? Is it below the low of that bar? No, you cannot do that. We have dojis here. We might get two legs down. We may get a third leg down to a wedge bull flag. Still bullish. Still likely that we're going higher. So if you take that buy, your stop is down here. Had you taken that buy and you bought above the high of this bar, you would have been filled here at the top of this bear bar. The market went to a new low and then resumed up. Once the market started going up, you could calculate what your actual risk was. You actually had to risk from your entry price to one tick below the bottom of the pullback bar. So that's your actual risk. High probability trade since you're buying in a strong bull trend. Therefore, mathematically okay to take profits at one times your actual risk. The initial risk was down here. This is where the stop was. If you buy up here, it pulled back a little bit more and resumed up. Once it's starting to go up, you knew that you actually only had to risk to below this bar. Although you did not know it at the time, if you put your stop at that line, which turned out to be one tick below that bar, you would not have been stopped out. So that means you actually risk from your entry price to this line, one tick below that pullback bar. The high one evolved into a high two in a strong bull trend and you have another good looking bull bar. It's a high probability bet that you're going to make money taking either one of those buys using the appropriate stop. Because you're taking a high probability buy, you can take profits that are just one times your actual risk. That's all you need for a positive trades equation. If your actual risk is less than a point, never take profits at less than a point. So you have to take profits at least one point. And if the market is moving up with fairly big bars, even one point is usually not enough. Here, the actual risk is more than a point and the trend is weakening. We're getting dojis and we're going sideways. High probability of a profit, reasonable to take profits at one times actual risk. You could also try to get out with one times initial risk, which would be your entry price here. Measured move up from your initial stop to your entry price and way up here. Some traders would hold for that, especially since they see a strong break out here. They expect a small second leg up. That would be reasonable as well. Obviously, you're going to exit over here because the day is ending. That would be getting out around one times your actual risk. Reasonable to take profits, one times actual risk. You buy above this bar, get filled here. The market starts to go up after pulling back. You know your actual risk is here. High probability of making money, reasonable to exit at one times actual risk, especially since you're making, it looks like maybe three, four or five points. Let's say you typically like using a two or three point stop in the E-mini. Here, if you're buying above this bull inside bar, your stop is down here and that is seven points below. You can only take that trade if you can reduce your position size. If your account is so small that you can only trade one contract, you cannot reduce your position size. And since the appropriate stop requires a smaller position, given how much you typically risk, you simply cannot take the trade. Just wait for another trade. We're in a trading range. The bear's got a breakout and a strong reversal up. Big tail, not good for the bulls, but close above the trading range high. And this small bull body, even though it's very tiny, is enough follow-through buying to make it likely or go at least a little higher. It's reasonable to buy the close of the breakout bar after the reversal up from the bear breakout, or the close of the follow-through bar, or on a stop above the high of this inside bar. It does not matter which of the buys you take. The stop is below the bottom of the bull reversal. All right. Without looking at the price scale, you say, wow, that's a pretty good reversal, pretty good rally. We're probably going higher. And you are right. However, if you normally risk two or three points on a trade, you cannot take this trade. Because if you buy here, these two bars are 70 points tall. You'd have to risk 73 points on this trade. If you normally risk two points or three points, you simply cannot take this trade. You just watch it and say, oh, this is interesting. It's a learning opportunity, but you're not going to be able to take the trade.solic Ace siete genauso as independent sales. If you're not Empire's economy, the last Bitcoin surge has dense dynamite in aerecht, Expert Out이식ket bunlar. It's a long-term ramifications. it, the market gapped down and hit the monthly 20-month exponential moving average and then reversed up strongly from that average. And the reversal from this low to that close is 73 points and it occurred in simply 10 minutes. The average daily range prior to today was only 20 points. And today, the first 10 minutes we have 73 points. Reasonable to buy the close, but only if you're comfortable risking that much money. If your account is so small that you don't typically trade multiple contracts, then you cannot reduce your position size and therefore you cannot take this trade. Your risk is maybe 20 times bigger than your typical risk and unless you can trade 1 20th as big as you normally trade, you should not take this trade. What does an expert do? Well, I'm buying this close, but I'll use the correct stop and I'll trade the correct position size. You have other choices as well. You could trade ETFs that mirror this, or you could trade a very small size or you could trade low price stocks that mirror this, or you could simply buy calls like weekly call options. What does an expert do? Well, I'm buying this close, but I'm buying this close. This is a day chart of the SPY, the SPY. Very strong bull trend. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. The market rallied about 20 points, which was about 10% over the course of about a month or so, a month or two. Let's say you did not get long here and let's say you're thinking about getting long here. And let's say you do not want to wait for a pullback. Where's your correct stop? All the way down here, about 20 points down, which is about 10% down. Some traders will say, gosh, I don't want to risk 10% on one trade. And therefore they have to look for stock replacement. Also, some traders who are long, let's say they're long the SPY will say, gosh, I don't want to risk 10% on my trade. I'm going to sell out of my SPY and then replace my stock with something else. Buying up here. Stop is down here. It's about 10% of the entire contract. Contract is 200. So your stop is about 20 points. That's about 10% below your entry price. A good choice if your account is big enough to allow you to trade options is to buy a call option or a call spread. I will talk about that more in the options trading course. A trick that some traders use is they enter on a lower timeframe chart. They look at one timeframe to see what patterns are unfolding. And then once they see one that looks good, they'll look at a smaller timeframe chart to place their orders to enter. Here's a five minute chart of the E-mini. The market rallied about 35 points here. Strong bull breakout rallying about 15 points in a matter of a half hour or so. You have to get long and you could buy for any reason. You could buy closes. Let's say you buy that close. Some traders, when they see a strong breakout like this, they have to get long. Everybody has to get long. And you have different choices. You can buy at the market, buy closes, or you can wait for a pullback. But the market may go very far before there actually is a pullback. If the market is rallying very quickly and you're afraid of missing out and you don't want to wait for the close of the bar and you don't want to stop too far below, an alternative is to look at a smaller timeframe chart and look for pullbacks there. For example, this is the one minute chart. This green box is exactly this green box. Had you bought this close, this is where you would have entered right there. The market keeps trying to reverse. A very tight pull channel. You have to assume all the reversals will fail and that you won't even see these pullbacks on the five minute chart. You do not. On the five minute chart, there are no pullbacks. Let's say you buy the close of this bar on the five minute chart. If you had placed the order to buy below the low of that bar, you would have to buy the lower. If you were able to go higher, you would have to look at the lower. But as the market was going up, you thought it was going to go higher and you were eager to get long. Some traders will look at a one minute chart. These first three bars are right here. On the five minute chart, if you're buying a pullback, you're buying up here, right there. This would be the same fill. If you had placed the order to buy below the low of that bar and you get filled here on the one minute chart, this is where you would have been filled. An alternative when you're seeing this market rallying like this is to put up a one minute chart. And as soon as you start to see three or four boulevards closing on their highs, you can buy the close. This is a buy the close rally on the one minute chart. And let's say you bought way at the top up here. This is the top of the blue box right here. It's really a pretty early entry on the five minute chart. And taking the one minute by the close entry is buying six and a half points lower than taking the five minute by the close entry. Or once you had four or five consecutive bull bars, you can look to buy at the low of the prior bar, betting that the first reversal down would fail. And here we finally have a bar going below the low of the prior bar. You place a limit order by the low of the prior bar, not filled, not filled, not filled. And you keep raising your order. At this point, when you see this bar close, you place a limit order by it as low, you finally get filled right here. You could also, as I said, simply buy closes on the one minute chart. After you've seen the three, four or five good bull bars closing on their highs, you simply buy at the market. And as you've done that here, your entry on the one minute chart would have been 8.75 points less than the entry on the five minute chart, buying the close up there. Does not matter where you buy, your stop is at the bottom of the bull leg, just below the bottom. Strong breakout, you have to get long. And if you're unable to buy closes, or if you don't want to risk that much, you can look at a one minute chart for an earlier entry, either buying closes on the one minute chart or buying the first pullback. I began by talking about the importance of using swing stops. Even if you're scalping, it's usually better to use a wide stop. If you're buying in a breakout, and the market starts to get pullbacks and enters a channel, you change how you trade, you begin to trade it like a channel. Breakouts often follow traps. The market is always trying to trap traders into doing something wrong. And very often, the market will have a setup to go one way, and then it will quickly reverse and break out in the other direction. So you have to be aware when traps are forming, and you get an opposite breakout. Some traders like to find setups on one chart, and then look to enter on a smaller time frame chart. And that is a reasonable thing to do. Most traders, however, should just trade one chart, and not be switching time frames. Too easy to make mistakes. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading breakouts. and now, so far with my согласnicos, I invite you to give a sovereignty. So it would be pretty much longer better. But, in the meantime, I it's my我也, I'm confident, but what happens there to be a sales blog? And putting my cash Restaurants, I would rate all the meetings This is the way summary of some competition of the DH BL. And this is the first time I digo that I'm doing, in fact, there's a story I don't actually just how I'm doing at first, I get from the μya B Jimmy, because I always wonder if I get your stuff out. I've actually bought some of those tips and things that are to do it. But, I want to be decisions that are wise. And I can do that too much longer. It's about something like that much more because I want to be afraid I'm feeling that it's not