 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video is about the setup that I use every day when I'm trading. This is a picture of me inside my office and you'll see there are two laptops in front of me. I use this one for trading and that one I use for the chat room. It has a couple extra charts, 15 minute chart, 60 minute chart, and a daily chart. And I keep the blinds closed. Actually, I have shutters. I keep the shutters closed. And I don't take calls except for my kids. And I certainly do not watch television. I always ignore the news and I certainly ignore the pundits on television. I don't want any distractions and I don't want to hear anybody else's opinion. And I am very focused when I'm trading. My goal is to take money from your account, from everybody's account, and put it into my account. And your job is to take money from mine. That's the game that we are both playing. And I'm going to take money from my account. On my five minute chart, which is the chart I look at all day long, you see that there are some lines. This blue line is the 20 bar exponential moving average. And then I have another blue line down here that is dotted. And that is the 60 minute 20 bar exponential moving average plotted on the five minute chart. I wrote a trade station indicator, which I will show you in a couple minutes, that plots the 60 minute moving average. The 60 minute 20 bar moving average on the five minute chart. And then this other line, I don't pay as much attention to it, is the 20 bar exponential moving average on the 15 minute chart. Again, plotted on this five minute chart. Now look at this. Here's my chart. And this might be your chart. And you say, wait a minute, Al. All my bars are above the moving average and a lot of your bars are below the moving average. What's going on? And one of the things could be that you're using a 24 hour chart, a Globex chart, but I only use the day session chart. So my moving average is calculated on bars that do not include the Globex session. Especially in the first hour or so, the moving average is very different on a Globex 24 hour chart than it is on a regular trading hour chart. And also you may be using quarterly charts. Charts based upon December or March or June or September. And I use continuation charts. So if you see differences between my charts and yours, those are probably the reasons why. This is my setup when I'm trading the Euro versus the dollar and all Forex pairs. And you can see there are three lines on the chart. Again, this is a five minute chart. If you're ever in my trading room, my screen looks something like this. Sometimes I change it. But basically this is my screen. I have a five minute chart. I pay a lot of attention to trend lines, measured moves, and prior highs and lows. And you can see the three moving averages, the five minute 20 bar exponential moving average. And then the moving average on the 15 minute chart. And then this blue dotted line is the 20 minute moving average on the 60 minute chart. I have a 60 minute chart here, a 15 minute chart here, and then a daily chart of the e-mini here. And then weekly and monthly. The screen that I now have, I don't show the weekly and monthly charts because the screen is too crowded. I mentioned that I wrote a formula or an indicator in TradeStation that allows me to plot pretty accurately the 60 minute 20 bar exponential moving average on a five minute chart. You cannot simply copy this and paste it into TradeStation because of hidden formatting codes. So you have to type it out every little character one at a time. This is a comparable indicator. It allows me to plot the 15 minute 20 bar exponential moving average on the five minute chart. If you're not comfortable with code or if you have a different broker and a different charting package and different indicators, you can approximate the 60 minute exponential moving average on the five minute chart by using on the five minute chart an exponential moving average set to 240 bars. There are 12 five minute bars in an hour times 20 bars. So 240 bars on the five minute chart gives an approximation. Without going into the math, that number is always too high because on the five minute chart, you have a lot of overlapping bars in the 60 minute chart only looks at every 12th bar on the five minute chart. So the number is never 240. You're actually better off using a smaller number like 220. That is a more accurate number if you're trying to get an approximation of the 60 minute moving average on the five minute chart. And the same is true for the 15 minute. You can say a 15 minute is three times bigger than a five minute. So three times 20 is 60 bars in your indicator. But because of overlapping bars on the five minute chart that get ignored on the 15 minute chart, using a number smaller than 60 is more accurate. 50 is usually better than 60. I also look at daily charts and on the daily charts, I do look at the 20 bar exponential moving average quite often. But when I'm trading stocks, I add simple moving averages as well. For example, a 200 bar simple moving average. If this is the daily chart, that would be a 200 day simple moving average. Here's 150 day moving average there. And the pink line is 100 day simple moving average. And then this faint gray line is a 50 bar simple moving average. And they're there because a lot of stock market traders trade them. You can see how the market hits the pink line, the 100 bar moving average, it goes up, goes up, it goes up. And then here it fell below the 100, but turned up at the 150. When I look at the Euro daily, weekly and monthly charts, these are the four that I typically look at. I have to say that I pay much less attention to these moving averages on the daily, weekly and monthly Forex charts than I do on stock charts. Because I think Forex traders pay less attention to them. This is Al Brooks and thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video shows my setup. That's up to the könnten, let Ga during right And when we'll talk about the bilateral what's the transferλλers. Exels the pot which look coresty even cuz they have lenses with these numbers. And the estadouncing noch they pay attention to them anymore. When they decide to have lenses of their vertical enoughρεuls to their own Мосhe footer, they don't have lenses to their own. And the other side's totally buy, at the bottom if they search theEu top dead now. As many of the systems, the body for the bike in theいる. But they're looking at all three places on the continent of the doesn'tpinel, they don't have any all these answers to their bleeding thanks. And love this les son says,verage on 번째 and the one of the doesn'tак, sweetheart out a list of parlance.