 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on trends. I'm going to be describing three types of trends in this video. The first is a trend that begins on the open. The next I'll talk about trending trading ranges. And finally, I'll talk about trends that are broad channels. When I talk about a trend from the open, I don't necessarily mean a trend from the first bar of the day, although it often begins with the first bar. In general, the first bar of the day has a 20% chance of being either the high or low of the day. When you have a trend from the open like this, the more bars that get added to it, the more likely this ends up as the low of the day. Here, we had a gap up. I'm not showing much of yesterday, only two bars. We have a gap up. And then the first two bars are bull bars. That alone is enough for me to think of the day as always in long. That is enough to make me think that the market's in a bull trend. Even though both bars have tails, one of them has a body that's at least half as big as the entire bar. Plus it's a pretty good sized body. The trend continued. Traders were buying all the way up. And we had an 11 bar bull micro channel. No bear bars, no pullbacks for the first 11 bars. We also started to get consecutive bull bars closing near their highs. And when you get that on the open like this, the odds are 60% or greater. You're going to get some kind of a measured move up. For example, based upon maybe the open of the first bar to the close of the second bar of the breakout. And a measured move up takes us to around there. When you see that on the open, a gap up and then one bar, two bar, three bars, all bull bars, and then you start getting breakout bars. There's a sense of urgency. And that's usually a sign that you're at the start of what will become a strong bull trend. First 11 bars, traders bought at or above the low of the prior bar. They were not even waiting for pullbacks. Everyone was so eager to buy that they were buying at the market at the close of the bar. They were hoping to buy below the low of the prior bar. But the market for 11 bars did not trade below that prior bars low. When you have a lot of urgency on the open like this, a very strong breakout lasting about an hour or so, the market then usually goes sideways for several hours and then decides between trend reversal down and trend resumption up. Here the market was in a trading range for three hours. At the end of the day, we got a little trend resumption up. When you're trading the Forex market, the open is rarely ever exact. Some days the move, for example, in the United States session, it might begin at 530. Other days it might begin at 630. Other days 5 o'clock or 445. So when I'm talking about a trend from the open, I'm usually talking about a market that has a single session and a clear open, like the stock market or the day session of the E-mini. I usually do not use the phrase trend from the open when I'm referring to the Forex market or any other 24 hour market. These are open basically 24 hours a day and the sessions overlap. And the start of the sessions is usually not the same every day. There's often a breakout on a report around the start of the session and I end up using some other term to describe the trend. For example, here I just simply call it a breakout. We have a bull breakout and then a channel. For me, this is a bull spike and channel pattern. And it was also a small pullback bull trend. The pullbacks were very small. Rather than calling this a trend from the open, I would call it a spike and channel bull trend. The Forex market really only has one clear open a week, but it has three sessions every day. Each of the three sessions can have a trend from the open of the session, although that open is not necessarily exactly the same time every day. For example, here for the Euro versus the dollar five minute chart, the start of the session usually corresponds to the start of when financial markets start to get active. And that is around 530 in the morning Pacific time, 830 in the morning Eastern time. When you get a big move like this, you can call it a trend from the open bear trend. But since it can begin at different times on any given day, I would rather simply call it a breakout. Here's again the Euro versus the dollar. And here's the start of the European session. A tight trading range, a pretty unremarkable start. However, it became the high of the session. You have a small bear bar and very bad follow through. There's some hesitation on the open, some lack of certainty. It could still be a trend from the open bear trend, even though it's beginning with very quiet, two sided trading range type of price action. If I were to use the phrase trend from the open in this market, I would call this a trend from the open bear trend. And it's still trending down from the open, even though it's sideways. And then it's starting to enter a tight bear channel, a much stronger bear trend, a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. We have a nine bar bear micro channel. Five of the bear bars have big bodies and they close near their lows. And there are three consecutive strong bear bars here. So this is the beginning of what will probably result in at least some kind of a measured move down. Maybe based upon the height of this breakout, takes us down here, maybe further. In fact, it did go further. Do you want to call this a trend from the open bear trend? Here's the start of the US session. You can, I would simply call it a tight channel bear trend or a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. In any case, it's a strong enough trend, nine bar bear micro channel, several strong bear bars. The odds are we're going at least a little bit lower. The bears are eager to sell. They're not waiting for pullbacks. They're selling before there is a pullback. So they're not trying to sell above the high of the prior bar. They're selling at the market. They're selling bear closes. They're very eager to sell. And if everybody's eager to sell, chances are even a small pullback, traders will be eager to sell it. They were willing to sell even without pullbacks. And when they finally do get a pullback, you know, the odds are high that rather than a reversal up, it's going to be a bear flag. And that we're probably go at least a little bit lower. I now want to talk a little bit about trending trading ranges, a trend made up of a series of trading ranges. When I see a trading range like this on the open of the market and the trading range is about half of the height of an average day's range, I'm assuming that today's range will be like an average day's range and that the range will double. It can double by going up for a measured move. It can double by going down for a measured move, or it can double by going a little bit down, a little bit up, a little bit down, a little bit up and remaining a trading range day. When a day does become a trending trading range day, you have an initial range, about half of an average day's range in height. And then you have a breakout. And the breakout is usually fairly brief, sometimes a single bar, sometimes five bars, sometimes six or seven bars, but it's brief. And then the market starts to enter another trading range. And this is a good example of a trending trading range day. We have a trading range, a brief breakout for a few bars, and then another trading range. 60% of the time when you have a trending trading range day like this, in this case, we have a bear trending trading range day. The market comes back up at least a little bit into the other range. A bear trending trading range day. I'm expecting that the market will at some point come at least a little bit above the bottom of the upper range. 60% of the time that happens. 40% of the time it does not. And the market either stays sideways or goes down for another leg. Like all trading ranges, once you have a trading range, you got to be thinking breakout mode. And the breakout can go in either direction. Here we have a trend reversal. So bear trend, a trading range, bear flag, but instead of a bear breakout, we're getting a bull breakout. In general, once the trading range extends for about 20 bars, this one's a little bit less. Once it extends for about 20 bars, the probability of the bull breakout is just as high as for the bear breakout. It's basically a 50-50 market. Again, 60% chance that the lower range will come back above the bottom of the upper range by at least a little bit. The breakouts, when you have a trending trading range day, usually last 3, 4, 5 bars, 6 bars, and then you start to get signs of another range. You can see here we have a couple of bull bars and then a bear bar, a bull bar, and then doji's. It looks like at this point we're probably going to enter another range and the day will be a trending trading range day. Once you get a 20 bar trading range, there's a 50-50 chance that you'll get a downside breakout, a trend reversal, 50-50 chance you'll get an upside breakout, a trend resumption. The market is searching for a fair price. It's trying this and traders decide that the price is too low. So we rally up in a pretty strong bull micro channel. And the rally is a search for sellers. Not enough sellers here, the market has to go higher to find sellers. I said 60% of the time, the range overlaps the range before. Well, look at this. The bottom of this range did not overlap the top of this range. And that's a sign that the bulls are a little bit stronger. However, we got this breakout and formed another range. The upper range did overlap the lower range by a little bit. Every time you get a reasonably strong breakout, the market is telling you that the price is still too low. It has to find sellers and it has to go higher to find them. Again, I mentioned that in this particular case, even though there's a 60% chance the range will overlap the prior range, there's a 40% chance it will not. And here we have a gap, the top of the lower range and the bottom of the upper range. A sign of strong bulls, the bears were unable to close the gap and it increases the chances that we're going higher. So when you're starting to get this breakout, you have to assume there's actually better than a 50-50 chance that the breakout will be successful. Here we do have overlap. The third trading range overlaps the second. And it's a sign that the trend is weakening. Strong bear breakout, bear micro channel, a lot of consecutive bear bars closing the other lows. Chances are we're going at least a little bit lower. Maybe this is a little bit lower. Maybe this is a little bit lower. But big down, big up, probably trading range. And then we have another bear breakout lasting a few bars. In fact, only one or two bars below the low of the upper range. As usual, 60% chance the top of the lower range will overlap the bottom of the upper range by at least a little bit. And after 20 or 30 bars, it's in breakout mode and you can get trend resumption down or trend reversal up. The probability of the two is about the same after about 20 or 30 bars. In this particular case, the market decided that the price was too low and it had to go higher to find sellers. And this is common. At the end of the session, the market decides, will the bear trend resume? Will it reverse like it did here? Or will it simply continue sideways into the end of the day? You can see videos on trading ranges and trading the end of the day for more information about what takes place at the end of the session. Again, the euro versus the dollar, a five minute chart. There's actually a wedge bottom here. Can you see it? Three pushes down, one, two, three. I know the second push falls below the line connecting the first and third, but that's common. We have a bear trend and then late in the bear trend after 20, 30 bars here after 50 or 60 or 70 bars, the market enters a triangle. Triangles rarely are perfect, but this is one way to draw it. So, if you have a high, a second push, a third push, again, does not matter that the second is above the first. The overall idea is that we're narrowing. We're getting to a narrower tight training range. And we have at least three pushes up or down. One, two, three. You can argue three down. One, two, three. A bull breakout that reversed. And then you can restart the count. One, maybe two, and then three. In any case, it's a breakout mode situation. When you do get a triangle late in a trend, here we've got a bear trend, and you get trend resumption, you have to think that the odds are usually 60 or 70% that the triangle will be the final bear flag and that it will lead to a reversal, as it did here. And it did in the form of a wedge. Probably we'll get at least two legs sideways to up one pullback, two. I'm finally going to be talking about trends that are in broad channels. We're in a bear trend, and we have deep pullbacks, but in general still forming lower highs and lower lows. One, two, three, four. We're in a bear trend. We're at least one straight line. We have a front end. One, two, three, four. We're not Today, we're going to be talking about a service in a break. One, two, three, two, three days. Here's a break-out pattern. Here's the break-out, but the pullback goes above the bottom of the break-out. Here's the break-out point. Here's the break-out point, and we have a pull-back above the bottom of the break-out point. Here's another break-out and it reversed up back above the bottom of the break-out. And when the pull-backs overlap the break-out points, I call it a stair-stair-stepping down. stepping down. Pull back above the breakout point. Pull back above the breakout point. So that's a stairs pattern and that's important to recognize. That tells you that bulls who are buying at this low and scaling in lower are making money. And that is a sign of a weak trend and a sign that the market will probably enter a trading range before too long. A broad bear channel always has 20 or 30 bars in it that are also in a trading range. And a lot of times when you look at the chart you're not sure if it's in a bear trend or in a trading range or if the bear trend has ended and converted into a trading range. When you're not sure whether it's still a bear trend, a bear channel, or a trading range does not matter. You trade it like a trading range. You look to buy low, sell high, and scalp. So you buy low, buy in the bottom third, and you scalp somewhere in the middle. On rallies when they reverse down you sell them. Since we still are in a bear trend you can swing trade the sell-offs, the bear entries, but in general a lot of traders simply scalp them because they're not sure whether the trading range will continue for a lot more bars and they'd rather just sell and scalp, sell and scalp, sell and scalp. A lot of times when the market is selling off like this and then you enter a trading range you're not sure what's going on. Are we forming a wedge? One, two, three. Are we forming a lower low major trend reversal? Are we forming a trading range? We're getting lower highs and lower lows. The answer is all of that. It's obviously still in a bear trend. It's obviously in a trading range and it's obviously forming a wedge bottom and a lower low major trend reversal. Because it is still in a bear trend a lot of traders will swing at least part of their position when they're selling. For the longs we're not yet in a bull trend so any long is a scalp. So traders taking counter trend positions. Here the trend is down so the counter trend position is buying. A bear trend so when you're buying you're buying only for a scalp. Traders will sell reversals down from the top of the channel. The channel it rarely is exact. Sometimes on television or on the web you'll see channels that look perfectly parallel but that's not how a channels typically look. The channels are rarely exact and you have to keep redrawing the lines. And anytime the market is near the top of the channel look to sell reversals down. We're in a bear trend so it's less important to buy reversals up from new lows. Although when traders see a lot of two-sided price action and they start to see pullbacks going above breakout points a lot of traders will buy reversals up from new lows for scalps. Three pushes down. One, two, three. The second entry for a failed breakout below a prior low. Common in trading ranges so some bulls will buy that at least for a scalp. Double top bear flag and a bull breakout. You can say head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. However, we're still in a bear trend and you have to be ready for the bull breakout to fail. When you have a double top and a bull breakout that fails, I think of that as a variation of a wedge. We have three pushes up. One, two for the double top bear flag. And then the bull breakout is the third push. For me, functionally, this is the same as a wedge bear flag and I'm expecting at least a couple legs sideways to down. One, pull back two. A reasonable sell. Failed breakout above a double top bear flag. Another lower high in a bear trend. And a decent sell signal bar. Traders at this point redraw the channel that way. We got a breakout above the channel. Another reversal down. Traders will sell below that bar even though it's a bull bar. We have another double top bear flag and a bear channel. A new low. Stair stepping down. Traders will buy a reversal up or they'll simply buy at that low and then they're willing to buy more lower. Again, when you're buying in a bear trend or in a trading range, it's better only to scalp. After every reversal down, you redraw the line. And then when you test that new line, traders will look to sell a reversal down again. After every new high, you draw a new line and you see how the market behaves at that line. And you sell a reversal down here or reversal down there. You can draw the line that way. You can draw the line this way. Or you can simply say another new low and a broad bear channel. So traders should buy reversals up or they simply buy at that prior low looking for a scalp. So traders will sell somewhere in the middle of the last bear leg. So we have a bear leg. Here's the middle third of that bear leg. Traders will look to sell somewhere in the middle third. For example, a breakout into the middle third. And then we have a bear bar reversing down. So traders will sell below there or below here. Another bear leg starting here or here. This is the middle third. Traders will look to sell somewhere in the middle third. If they get a reversal down, for example, we're breaking out to the upside. Traders will look to sell below the low of a bar. Betting that a pullback to the middle third of the prior bear leg will result in another lower high. We're getting lower highs. The same here. Most recent bear leg. Traders look for a pullback somewhere to the middle of that bear leg. And then they sell reversal down. Expecting another new low in the bear trend. And bears take profits at the prior lows. So the bears who sell here will take at least partial profits at the prior low. The bears sell here. They'll take profits around the prior low. Bears who sell here. They'll take profits around the prior low. Bulls who buy. They're looking to scalp out somewhere in the middle third where the bears are going short. So for example, a bull who places a limit order to buy at this low. He gets filled. He'll look to sell. Take profits for a scalp somewhere in the middle third. And one way to do it is either with a limit order at a certain number of ticks or pips. Or simply sell the reversal down. Take your profits there. A bull buying at this low. Sees the market continuing down. However, he's confident that because we're in a stairs pattern, we're going to get back above this breakout point. So some of the bulls who buy here will buy more down here. Their second purchase is at least the size of a typical scalp. Because if it does continue down like this, a lot of them will try to get out on their first entry. Break even on their first. And with a scalp on their second. So they want to make sure that that second entry is at least the size of a scalp below the first. So you buy here. Buy more here. And then look to exit around the original entry. Bears. They're looking to sell around the middle third anytime there's a reversal down. Here we have a breakout and a pullback below the breakout. A breakout and a pullback below the breakout. So it's a stairs pattern. But what do you notice about the stairs pattern? The size of this breakout from this high to that high is less than the size of the breakout from this high to that high. So the stairs are shrinking. The bulls are less confident that the market is going to continue higher. So they're quicker to take profits. The bears are more confident that it's going to evolve into a trading range soon. And they're more eager to sell. So the height of this breakout is two ticks. And the height of that breakout is only one tick. It's also three pushes up. One, two, three. So a wedge top. When you see a shrinking stairs pattern, you have to be thinking that the bull channel is probably ending and that the market will soon evolve into a trading range. Once it falls below a major higher low, then the pattern of higher lows is no longer still intact. And if the market's not making higher lows, it's no longer in a bull trend. It's either in a bear trend or a trading range. This sell off is not particularly strong. It does not have consecutive big bear trend bars and is finding support at that major higher low. This looks more like a bear leg in what will become a trading range. In any case, it's no longer a bull trend. Here are shrinking bear stairs. That's the size of that breakout. The next breakout is smaller before the bulls come in. Next breakout smaller. Next breakout smaller. Well, the bears are taking profits faster and the bulls are more eager. 17 pip breakout before we get a pullback over here. The market only fell six below the breakout point before we got the pullback. And then we ended up with a double bottom higher low major trend reversal and shoulders bottom left shoulder and right shoulder. The loss of momentum, the loss of strength on the part of the bears means that the bear trend probably is ending and the market will probably enter a trading range or possibly a bull trend. And once you break above a major higher low like this, a strong bear breakout to a new low. So this higher low is major. Once you break above it, the market is no longer in a bear trend. It's then either in a trading range or in a bull trend. And at this point you can say, well, that's a bull trend. Well, not necessarily. We're still below the top of the bear trend. And this might simply be a bull leg in a trading range. In any case, it's no longer a bear trend. Here's a daily chart of the euro versus the dollar. Again, a trend continues as long as the bear trend. It's making major higher lows. We have a series of higher lows and higher highs. So we're in a bull trend, but we're getting very deep pullbacks. And some of the pullbacks are strong enough so that traders would conclude that the market is always in short, no longer always in long. Yet we're still forming higher lows and higher highs. So even though there are times when the reversals down are enough to make traders believe we're always in short, the big picture is we're still in a bull trend. We have a bull channel with very deep pullbacks, strong bear pullbacks, but we're continuing to form new higher lows. It's a broad bull channel. The bulls are looking for pullbacks to the middle third or so of the prior bull leg and they'll look to buy in the middle third or they'll buy a reversal up. Here a bull trend, a bull leg. Here's a pullback into that middle third. Bulls are looking to buy here. Another leg up. This is the middle of that leg up. The bulls are looking to buy somewhere in the middle of that last leg up. Higher probability of profit if traders are buying above a bull bar or after a second leg down. So one pull back to micro double bottom small bull bar. Higher probability buying above that two legs down one pull back to does not really look like two legs, but it is too small legs. And then one pull back to maybe this is already two legs double bottom. So it might be one and then new high, but part of the correction from this high and two legs down. But anyway, it's a double bottom in the middle third. Traders will buy reversal up micro double bottom. They'll buy a reversal up wedge bull flag. One, two, three. They'll buy a reversal up. We're still in the middle third. They'll buy a reversal up. And bulls are taking profits at new highs. You know that because the market is going down. The market makes a new high and it goes down. That means traders are selling. Bulls are selling to take profits. Bears are selling to go short. Even though the breakout here was strong, look what happened. The pullback eventually fell below the top of the breakout. And that's telling us that it's okay to start selling at new highs using wide stops and scaling in. Bears sell new highs for scalps. Here, they probably would sell more here and get out break even on their first entry with a profit on the second entry. Here, it immediately went down. So they simply scalp out somewhere in the middle third of the last bull leg. Same here. They sold. Did not go up high enough for them to scale in. But it did not go up high enough for them to scale in. But it did pull back into the middle third of the most recent bull leg and they took profits. The price is not going down. The price is not going down. The price is not going down. The price is not going down. The price is not going down. So they sell more and then try to get out break even on their first entry and then with a profit on their second entry. If they sell at the prior high and it immediately goes down, they simply take their profits. Somewhere in the middle third of the most recent bull leg. Same here. They sold. Did not go up high enough for them to scale in. But it did pull back into the middle third of the most recent bull leg and they took profits. In this video, I talked about three types of trends. A trend from the open trend. A trend that begins on the first bar or second or third bar of a session. I next talked about trending trading range days where early in the session there's a trading range. But the trading range is only about half of the height of a typical daily range. So traders expect the range to double. And finally, I talked about broad channels. For example, a broad bull channel has deep pullbacks. And sometimes the sell offs are so strong, the market is always in short, at least for a little bit. Yet it reverses up from a higher low. So the series of higher highs and higher lows continues. And therefore the market is in a bull channel, which is a type of bull trend. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks training course. This is the fourth of five videos on trends. If we follow in particular and you all be on your side all over the path as well. Welcome to the Maddo meaningful trading sites where I find nice and厳しい 주세요. Thank you.