 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fourth of seven videos on protective stops. For a trend to continue, it has to respect prior pullbacks. It needs to continue to make trending higher highs and higher lows. At some point, your premise will change. For example, if you're holding a position and you believe you're in a trend, but the market price action tells you that is no longer likely, then you have to change how you're trading the market. We clearly have a bull trend with higher lows and higher highs. And whenever the market's in a trend, you can always draw lines that contain the price action, a bull channel. A trader who's buying or is long is holding his position on the theory that this is a bull trend. As long as the market is continuing to make major higher lows, then it's continuing to be in a bull trend. For example, this is a minor higher low. The rally that followed it was only very brief and the market fell below it, but it did not fall below this low. A strong breakout to a new high. This is a much more important higher low. This is a minor. And if the market falls below it, a trader is not going to change his opinion that the market's in a bull trend. He'll still believe it's a bull trend and he'll believe that the pullback is simply more complex. After every strong breakout, especially a strong breakout to a new high, traders will raise their stop to below the most recent higher low. That is a major higher low. If the market never falls below a major higher low, then the premise that the market's in a bull trend is no longer correct. The market has then evolved into either a trading range or possibly even a bear trend. Here we have a strong breakout to a new high. We have a major higher low. Yet we had a strong reversal down that broke below this higher low. Once the market does that, do you still believe the market's in a bull trend? It might be in a much broader, flatter bull channel, but most traders would look at this and say the bull channel now has evolved into a trading range, possibly even a bear trend. It broke below the channel, the trend line. Bears will start looking for lower highs to sell, hoping for a series of lower highs and a bear trend. For example, a lower high major trend reversal. Not high probability after three bull bars, two of them being big. More likely big down, big up, big confusion and sideways. Is this a minor or major higher low? I would call it a major higher low. We have three bull bars closing the other highs and we have a new high. However, I also think that we've had several pushes up. We're getting near the top of the channel. If we do get a reversal down, the market might start to form a trading range. In any case, if the market falls below this low, probably the market is going to go sideways. Big up, big down, big confusion. This might be minor in the eyes of some traders. Vars are not all that big. And as I said, this two-legged pullback is still above this higher low and above this low. The bulls still might be in a very broad bull channel. We had a strong pullback after an initial very strong breakout and we've trended up since then. This is a more important higher low than this. This is, I think, major enough so that bull swing traders will conclude the markets probably in a trading range. But some traders will look at it as minor and maybe we're just pulling back to a large wedge bull flag and we'll get trend resumption up. This, I think most traders believe, is a strong attempt by the bears to reverse the trend and the bulls reversed up strongly instead. This is a very important higher low. Most traders would view this as very important. Some would view this as important. Others would view it as minor. We have a spike pullback channel, three pushes up, one, two, three. We also have maybe a 30 or 40 bar very tight bull channel coming from this low. If the market falls below this low, the final bulls will give up. And that's what took place with these two big bull bars. The bulls believed it should not have fallen below this low if the premise of a bull trend or even a trading range was intact. And by falling below that low, the final bulls gave up. Some gave up below this low over here and then others gave up here, but they bought this low. You can see we pulled back. However, once it fell below this low, the market collapsed. The final bulls gave up on the premise of a bull trend. Some bulls gave up here. Others gave up here. Possibly minor higher low, possibly a two-legged pullback. One, two. Bulls trying to buy here. But everyone agreed that if it fell below this high or low or this high or low, then the bull trend is no longer valid. The market's then either in a big trading range or in a bear trend. And you can see the give up bars, the very big sell off. And that represents the final bulls deciding that the premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. In fact, their premise of a bull trend or possibly a deep pullback in a trading range is no longer valid once it fell below that low and that low. Very strong breakout follow through. Chances are the market's going to fall for some measured move down. The market's always in short. Traders are selling for any reason. And they'll sell the first rally betting that we'll get at least a small second leg down. After a surprise breakout like that. A bear trend, we have lower lows. More importantly, we have lower highs. You can draw a trend line across the top of the channel. You can draw a line below as well. As long as the bear trend keeps getting strong breakouts to new lows, traders believe it's in a bear trend. If it rallies above one of the major lower highs, traders will conclude that the premise is no longer valid. It's no longer a bear trend. If it's not a bear trend, then it's either a trading range or a bull trend. Is this a major lower high? We have a breakout and we have a new low. However, the breakout is not particularly strong. Some traders would consider this to be relatively minor. And therefore, if the market goes above it or a little bit above it, they'll say that maybe we're still in a bull trend. This is more important. We tried to reverse up strongly. We got a double top bear flag. We have a persistent sell-off lasting about 30 bars. This is, I think, a more important lower high. A weak bear breakout, if it goes above this high, it's not necessarily clearly bullish. It's less bearish, but not necessarily clearly bullish. When I get a reversal up from a weak sell-off like this, especially when we're still in a bear channel, we're still below the bear trend line, the first reversal up is probably minor, which means either a bear flag or a bull leg in what will become a trading range. If the market is converting into a trading range, traders will switch how they're trading. They'll look to buy low, sell high, and scout. They'll no longer hold short for swing trades. They'll take profits at new lows, betting that the breakouts will not fall very far. And they'll sell rallies, betting that the bulls will be unable to get a reversal. Bulls will buy at prior lows, betting that the bear breakouts will fail. And the market becomes a trading range because traders are buying low. Both bulls and bears buy low. And both bulls and bears sell rallies. Neither one holds on to positions long because they think the market will not go very far up or down. And the result is the market goes sideways. We're sideways here, a double bottom, a little bit of a wedge pullback, one, two, three, and then a double bottom here. A surprise bar, a big bull trend bar and a follow through bar. We're probably always in low and we'll probably get at least a small second leg up. One, pull back, two. If the market rallies above a major lower high like this, the bears will give up and the bulls will get very confident and the result could be a bull trend. Double bottom with this low and any of these lows. A double bottom and a higher low after breaking above the bear trend line. So a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. The bars are small. We're in a tight trading range. No sign that the market is going to go very far soon. However, it's reasonable to start to buy maybe above a bull bar like this. Lots of small bars. The market's going sideways. Lots of reversals. Bad follow through after bull bars and bear bars. The market thinks this is an appropriate price. Both bulls and bears are satisfied with this price. However, every trading range is followed by a breakout. And if there's a strong breakout with follow through, the bear trend will probably evolve into a trading range or possibly even a bull trend. If there's no strong breakout and follow through, you have to assume every breakout will fail. A bear breakout. Bull attempted a breakout. And then bears. Bulls. Bears. We have a bull breakout and follow through. A pair of bull bars closing above the high of the past maybe 50 bars or so. Good for the bulls. It's not especially strong. The bars are not all that big relative to what we've had over here. And the follow through, instead of being a series of very big bull trend bars, is a series of small dojis. This is a weak rally. And probably this entire rally will end up as a bull leg and what will become a trading range. We're attempting to reverse up from a lower low. And then we sold off to a new low. Sold off for maybe 15 bars. And we had a big bear bar. This is, I think, an important lower high. If the bears are going to continue to believe the market's in a bear trend, they do not want the market to rally above any major lower high. Because then their premise of a bear trend is no longer valid. And they'll have to switch how they're trading. So instead of trading like a bear trend, they'll trade like a trading range or a bull trend. Ten or more bars to a new low. Pretty good bear bar. Pretty good bear breakout. We have lots of reversals in here. A higher low here. A lower high here. And even here, we have a higher low here. A lower high here. Most of these reversals create minor lower highs and lower lows. You can see even going down, going up, we're just not getting good follow through either way. This entire sell off looks like it's a bear leg and what will become a trading range. This rally, the absence of consecutive big bull trend bars, probably a bull leg and a trading range. And that's true all the way here. The only clearly strong lower high, major lower high, is here, maybe here. Some computers will consider this major. Most computers will not consider these as particularly major. And if the market breaks above these lower highs, probably the breakout is not significant. It's probably not changing the market into a bull trend. There's another problem with this lower high that makes it really not all that important. It's not the top of the current bare leg. It's like this. A lower high after the top of the bare leg. This is not nearly as major as this. And the same is true of this. If you're looking for a major lower high, you want it to be the top of the current bare leg, not halfway down. And the same with this. We have a bare breakout, but does not go to a new low. Going above it does not convert the market into a bull trend. Even going above this does not convert it into a bull trend. It weakens the bare case, but probably the market's transitioning into a trading range. Even looking at this rally, bull bar doji, bare bull bars tail, and then looking at the sell off. Bare bar doji, bare bar bull bar. A bare bar doji, bull bar, bare bar bull bar. All of this trading looks like the market's evolving into a trading range. Trading ranges resist changing into trends. Therefore, if the market breaks above these lower highs, even with a relatively strong breakout like this or like this, it's probably simply a bull leg in a trading range. The bear trend has evolved into a trading range. It has not turned into a bull trend by simply going above minor lower highs. Here, we closed above the top of the entire range. This, I think, is a major lower high. We got a new low. We're starting to form a series of higher highs, and now we have a breakout and a follow-through bar. This is potentially a gap for a measured move up. The trading range now is converting into a bull trend. Strong bull breakout above lower highs, but not the top of the current bare leg. These are minor lower highs, and that is not enough to make traders believe the market's now in a bull trend. It's probably a bull leg in a trading range. After the bull breakout, look at the bar that followed, the two bars that followed. They've pretty much totally reversed the entire rally. And bad follow-through after the breakout. That means that more trading range is likely and less likely the start of a bull trend. Strong bull breakout, bad follow-through, probably bull leg in a trading range and more sideways. The same right here. Strong breakout above the top of the cell climax, but bad follow-through, probably sideways. Here we have a breakout and a bull bar and another bull bar. Also a close above the top of the past 40 or 50 bars. The tails on top make the rally less likely to be very strong. However, the breakout is good enough, so traders will expect at least a little bit more up. Maybe a measured move up based upon the height of the trading range. Top of the range, we have a double top and we have a neckline. Instead of falling below the neckline for a measured move down, we're breaking above the double top. Therefore, traders will look for a measured move up. And you can see what happened when the market cut around the area of the measured move target. The bulls took profits and the bears probably started to sell, at least for a scalp. Trends do not go on forever. They eventually change. Trading ranges do not go on forever. They eventually break out. If you're in a trade and you're trading based upon the current price action, but the price action changes, you have to change how you're trading. Let's say you're a bull and you see a 4 consecutive bull bar break out to a new high. Break out above a wedge top. 1, 2, 3. In general, if you break above a wedge top, 50-50 chance you'll rally for a measured move up. 50-50 chance the breakout will fail and reverse back down. But let's say you bought that close. The fourth consecutive bull bar. But it's also the strongest rally in the entire trend, certainly in the last 20 bars or so. And therefore, 60% chance it's an exhaustion move and the market will trade down to the bottom of the buy climax down here. You have to be ready to exit if you bought that close. If you get bad follow through, and you did. The spare bar is terrible follow through for traders who bought that close. If you bought that close, your initial stop is right below the bottom of the breakout, the most recent major higher low. However, after you get 3 or 4 consecutive bear bars closing near their lows, your premise of a bull trend has to change. This looks more like a reversal and an exhaustive buy climax. And if so, 60% chance we're going to get down below the bottom of the buy climax. Four consecutive bear bars closing on their lows makes a reversal more likely than a continued bull trend. Your premise of a bull trend has changed. Do you wait for the market to hit your stop? Of course not. You no longer believe it's a bull trend. You believe this is an exhaustion gap. This close to that high. And then once this bar closes, this low to this high, this to this high, the market is now probably having an exhaustive buy climax and a reversal down to the bottom of the buy climax. And then it decides whether to fall for a measured move down or go sideways, maybe resume up. Most bulls would exit below that bear bar closing on its low, betting that this is a higher high major trend reversal, bull trend bear breakout higher high. Especially an exhaustion gap. The strongest bull move late in a bull trend probably is the end of the bull trend, especially if you have this kind of bar following the bull breakout. Aggressive bears will sell, betting that this is the end of the bull trend and that we'll get down to the bottom of the buy climax. And that the breakout above the wedge top will fail. Bears wanting a higher probability will wait until the market has three or four consecutive bear bars and then they'll sell the close here or sell the close here and put a stop above here. Higher probability to wait for several consecutive bear bars. But your stop is further away. If you sell below this bar, you get filled here. If you sell the close here, your stop is still here further away. But higher probability, reasonable to short either way. Again, whenever you get the strongest bull move late in a bull trend, it's probably going to be an exhaustive move and the market will probably get down to the bottom of the bull breakout before it goes for a measured move up. Also, whenever you have a wedge top, any place where there's a logical stop. The bears are sold here. Their logical stop is above the height of this bar. Anytime the market hits a logical stop, 50-50 chance the market will continue up for a measured move, maybe based upon the height of this range. 50-50 chance the breakout above the stop location will fail and the market will reverse down. You can think of it as consecutive tops. We had a wedge top, failed, and now we have another top, an exhaustive, biclimax top. A triangle, you can simply call it a tight trading range. If you want, you can call it a triangle. 20 or more bars long in a bull trend often becomes the final bull flag. If there's a bull breakout, the market tries to come back to the middle of the triangle. We know that there's a 60% chance the market is going to come all the way down to the bottom of the buy climax when you get that kind of a follow-through bar. Maybe a trading range, maybe a bear channel. In any case, we have a bear breakout closing far below this low. And then we have a follow-through bar as well. Two legs down, measured move down, likely. Because of that, some bears will sell that close and put a stop above the top of the current bear leg. This is a very tight bear channel. It looks like a 7 bar bear micro channel. And that means that the bears are strong. They'll sell the first reversal up. The first reversal up will therefore be minor and lead to either a trading range or a bear flag. The bulls can argue a wedge, 3 pushes down, 1, 2, 3, parabolic wedge. They can also argue this doji is a pause from this breakout and the start of a second leg down. This breakout and follow-through are strong enough so the market will probably have at least a second leg down. And it's possible that these two bear bars represent the end of that second leg down. Some bears will look at this and say, okay, we have six good bear bars, eight bars in the bear channel. Chances are the first reversal up is minor and therefore I'll place a limit order to sell at the high of the prior bar and I would get filled here. Betting that the reversal up is minor and it will become a bear flag or simply a bull leg in a trading range. The bears who did sell do not like this bull bar closing on its high and having a big bull body. Therefore they're wondering if the parabolic wedge is taking control of the market. Three reversals up, 1, 2, 3. This might have been the entire second leg down after this first leg down. Rally continuing. Now we have four bull bars, three with decent sized bull bodies. Some bears will sell at a 50% pullback of the bear trend. Top of the bear trend, bottom of the bear trend, 50% pullback. Four consecutive bull bars closing near their highs. Possibly we've already had the second leg down. However, very tight bear channel. The first reversal up, probably the best the bulls get is a trading range. Also big down, surprisingly big up. Big down, big up creates big confusion. Big confusion is a hallmark of a trading range. Probably the market's going to go sideways. However, because of the big reversal up, the premise of a bear trend is probably no longer valid. Instead, the market probably is evolving into a trading range. After the three bull bars closing on their highs, a lot of the bears will exit. And then they'll wait, just in case this in fact is a reversal that will lead to a bull trend. Three bull bars and a bear trend, bull bars closing on their highs. Most traders assume they'll be at least a small second leg up. Traders who are short will exit. They'll take the loss. If they sold here and sold more here, they'll just get out here. And they'll look to sell again in a few bars if the market starts to resume down. Aggressive bulls will say, well, we've got three good looking bull bars, two closing on their highs, both good sized bodies. Probably the first reversal down will not get very far. And therefore, I'll place a limit order to buy at the low of the prior bar and I'll get filled right here. And these bulls will scale in lower as well, betting that the first reversal down will result in a minor bear resumption, a higher low, and at least a small second leg up. And this is what we got. We continued up. We had a pullback to around 50% and then a bigger second leg up. Some of the bears who sold this close kept their stop above this high. Sometimes when you have two reasonable stop locations, for example, here, the top of the sell climax or the top of the bear trend, it's okay to use your stop above either one. A lot of traders will put it above the top of the sell climax. Whenever the market has a big reversal like this, big down, big up, it's probably in a trading range. When the market's in a trading range and there are two logical locations for a stop for the bears and the two stops are relatively close, it's usually better to use the higher stop because the market often goes above the lower one, but not above the higher one. So it goes above the lower one and reverses down. I talk more about this in the video on how to trade in trading ranges. Remember, you have some bears who sold here and put a stop above the top of the entire bear trend. Some bears sold here and they get out above this high, but they'll sell again on a reversal down. The scale in bears who sold here, some would sell below a bear bar here, others would wait for the second leg up and then sell below a bear bar here or here. This is especially good because it went above one resistance level but not above the second. You have some bears selling here and selling more here, stop above the top of the entire bear leg. Many will place a limit order to get out at their original entry price. Trying to get out break even on their first sell, even though the market retraced almost all of the bear trend. They get out break even on this sell. On this sell, they exit here as well and they make a profit. And you can see when the market got to this original entry price, it bounced. That's a sign that some traders were buying and some of those traders were bears buying back shorts. I call these scale in bears. The bears sold here, they added to their position on the reversal down. They scaled in, they are scale in bears. They are scale in bears. We have three strong pushes down, even below the bottom of this strong bull leg. And now we have an exceptionally strong reversal up. Traders will look to buy the close of this bar and they'll buy any pullback. For example, above this bar, a high one buy. Or even with a limit order below this bar, betting that there'll be a second leg up and the reversal down will become a bull flag and not a bear trend. They can buy the close, they can buy with a stop above the high of this small bull flag, a decent looking bull signal bar. The stop is either below the bottom of the buy climax or below the bottom of the entire bull trend. When you buy a close like this, there's always a possibility that the market could pull back very deeply all the way down to below the bottom of the spy climax. If it does, then a trading range is more likely than a bull trend. But if it's a trading range, a bear leg will be followed by a bull leg. And the traders who buy here and put a stop here or here probably will be able to avoid a loss and usually are able to make a profit. Because after that sell off, we'll have big up, big down, big confusion trading range. The market probably will trade back up here to create a top to the trading range. We have a strong bull breakout, bad follow through here and again here. Possibly this is a bull leg in a trading range and it could be a very deep pullback. Now we have a wedge, three pushes up, one, two, three, or one, two, three. Even though three did not go above two, it's still three pushes up. I call that a truncated wedge where the third push does not go above the second. Computers still treat it like a wedge and they'll look to sell a reversal down and bulls will get out on a reversal down. Different ways to draw the wedges. Different computers see them differently. Also one, two, three. Like I said, even though it's a slightly lower high for the third push, it still functions as a wedge. It's three pushes up. Micro double top, a bare inside bar. Many bulls will exit there, betting that it's a failed breakout above a prior high. We're probably evolving into a trading range. We have a wedge sell off. We have a wedge rally. It's reasonable to exit there, concluding that the premise of a strong bull trend is no longer valid. A trading range is more likely. And now we have three consecutive bear bars closing on or near their lows. Decent sized bodies. The bulls have a bull flag. They got a breakout. And now we have a bear breakout. Again, the premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. Probably the best the bulls get is a bull leg in what will become a trading range. And possibly it could be a reversal bull trend into a bear trend. After three consecutive bear bars, the remaining bulls, many of them, will exit on the close of that bar. And bears will sell as well, betting that the market is reversing, and that it will get down to the bottom of the buy climax. and that the bull trend, in fact, is simply a bull leg in what will become a big trading range. A bull trend has a series of higher lows. If the market falls below a major higher low, then the premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. The market's probably in a trading range or a bear trend. Likewise, a bear trend has a series of lower highs, as long as pullbacks respect major lower highs and do not go above them, the premise of a bear trend is still good. The market is still in a bear trend. If it gets above a major lower high, the market probably has evolved into a trading range and possibly has reversed into a bull trend. Anytime you're taking a trade, you're taking it based upon a belief, a premise. For example, if you're buying in a bull trend, you believe the market's in a bull trend. Trends do not last forever. However, if your premise of a bull trend is no longer valid, do not continue to trade the market like a bull trend. Exit and then re-evaluate what to do. The same is true for a bear trend. If your premise of a bear trend is no longer valid, exit and then look for your next trade and trade in a way that's appropriate for the current market condition. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of seven videos on protective stops. This is the fourth of seven videos on service. I'm on 이러ed on Theory ofعةار Silence, which of course is dignified, has waived that for the limited price to refer.\ You have to explain this.