 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on trading Broad Bull channels. I want to talk a little bit about major and minor lows inside of Broad Bull channels. And an important point about a Broad Bull channel is it sometimes has bare legs that are strong enough to make the market always in short. Yet those bare legs are still within a Broad Bull channel. This is several days of a five minute chart. And you can see the market is working higher and it has strong sell-outs along the way. Yet every low led to a new high. This is a Broad Bull channel, even though it's not easy to see the channel. We're making new highs, new lows, higher highs, higher lows. This low fell below some of these lows, but formed a double bottom with this one and we went strongly to a new high. It's a bull trend and you have to call it something. It's not a strong breakout. It's not a tight channel. And that leaves you with a Broad Bull channel. We have a strong rally up to a new high. And once you have this strong rally to the new high, this low becomes important. I would call it a major low. If a pullback falls below this low, once you have a rally like this, if the market reverses down below this low, I would say it's no longer in a bull trend. Right now, this rally is at this point either in a bull trend, which it was, or possibly in a trading range. If we get a reversal down that falls below a major low, then it's no longer in a bull trend. It's then either in a bear trend or a trading range. So I pay attention if the market is trending up to major higher lows, minor higher lows like that or like this are not important, but the major higher lows are important. The market sold off strongly and then rallied in a pretty tight channel to a new high. At this point, you know this is a major higher low. And the same here. We gapped down, but we rallied up on a fairly tight channel to a new high. And therefore, this higher low is major as well. Here, the market collapsed on the open after a small gap down. Yet, it had an opening reversal up. And somewhere in here, once you're above these highs, you'd have to conclude that this is a major higher low in a broad bull trend. Even though the market here fell below these prior major higher lows. And at that point, the market is not in a bull trend. It's either in a bear trend or a trading range. It reversed up strongly. And at some point, when it starts to break above these lower highs, you have to conclude that the market is no longer in a bear trend or a trading range. It's back to being in a bull trend or a trading range. Remember, I said bull trend or a trading range. We have a major higher low here. Markets in a bull trend or a trading range. If it falls below this low, then it's either in a bear trend or a trading range. Now, it could still be in a trading range. And if it's in a trading range, it often falls below the low and then reverses up, which it did. But it's not back to a bull trend until it breaks above a major lower high. Major lower high. We have a lower high. And it broke to a new low below major lows. So it went back to a bull trend here. So at this point, when it starts to break above these highs, it's back to either a bull trend or a trading range. Again, major higher lows means a bull trend or a trading range. This low fell below these other major lows and therefore bear trend or a trading range. But then we broke above a major lower high and a major high here. So it's back to a bull trend or a trading range. These are major higher lows. These are minor higher lows. Do not lead to strong breakouts, even though they led to new highs. And some of them don't even lead to new highs. For example, here's a higher low. Did not even lead to a new high. So a minor higher low. We have a low and we have a breakout, but it's not particularly strong, even though it's a new high. I would call that a minor higher low. And I would look to the left to find the most recent major higher low, which is right here. Here we have a reversal up. Did not get to a new high. And the reversal up was brief. So I would call that minor as well. Here we have a reversal up and it reversed back down. Here we reversed up, not all that big. And it's at the top of the trading range. I think it's a fairly minor higher low. And therefore, if we fall below it, we still could be in a bull trend. Whenever the market falls below a minor higher low, bulls buy the reversal up, betting that the bull trend will continue. The odds of the market becoming a bear trend after breaking below a minor higher low are small. More likely the sell off is a bear leg in a developing trading range. We have a very tight channel. We have a lot of higher lows. They're all minor. And if the market reverses from a tight bull channel, the reversal is probably minor, a bear leg in a trading range or a bull flag. I mentioned this one earlier that a very strong breakout below a major higher low here and below a major higher low here and below all these minor higher lows. So at that instant, the market was either in a bear trend or a trading range. If it's in a trading range and it reverses up, traders will buy it because they're buying the bottom of a trading range. Here we have a possible slightly lower low double bottom. What caused the sell off? It probably was simply a sell vacuum test of support below major higher lows and especially this one, the bottom of a trading range. And the bulls bought it. Therefore, we had a double bottom. When you get a breakout, traders will look for a measured move up. I mentioned that even if you're in a bull trend, there can be times when the market is actually always in short. Some of the legs down in a broad bull channel are strong and the market can be always in short, which means the market's likely to go lower, not necessarily reverse the bull. So I'm not necessarily reversing to a major bear trend, but the bear leg still could go lower and be part of a broad bull channel. There are many days here. I don't know how many days there are, five or 10 days. I trade each day separately. And that means some of the days can be bear trend days, even though the overall trend on the chart that you see here is still bullish. This is a trading range. So traders look to buy low, sell high and take quick profits. And the same here. These are still trading ranges within a broad bull channel. When the market's in a broad bull channel, it usually is also in a trading range for a lot of the time. And sometimes it's even in brief bear trends. When the market's going up, obviously bulls are buying, betting on trend resumption up. And sometimes the swings down last 10 bars, 20 bars, 30 bars, and the market can even be always in short, which means traders will sell, expecting it to go at least lower enough so they can make a profit by selling. Even though overall, we're still in a broad bull channel. Here are the days on the chart that I showed you and taking them one day at a time. And you can see there's a lot of variety. We have a bull reversal in the open. We sold off a little bit, reversed up, and now we have a high two or a wedge bull flag. And now we're resuming up. Traders are buying on the way up and it became a very tight bull channel. And they traded it like a tight bull channel. They bought for any reason. They bought below bars, spending the reversals down will fail. This is more of a trading range day. Traders bought for scalps. They sold for scalps. And here we have a strong bear breakout below the bottom of the range. And whenever you have a strong bear breakout in a trading range day, you always have to be thinking it might be a second leg trap. And instead of a breakout leading to a trend down, it could be a breakout leading to a reversal up. First leg down was a high two bull flag. And second leg down was a strong bear breakout that failed. Again, a tight bull channel and the bulls bought for any reason at the market above bull bars, below bull bars. Another reversal up, two legs down. Traders will buy the reversal up. They'll buy closes. They'll buy close at the follow through bar. We have a bull flag. They'll buy a breakout of a bull flag. Here, a small high two bull flag. We went down. We went up. We went down again. And we're resuming up. Tight trading range. Most traders should not trade it, but limit order traders will scalp. They'll buy low, sell high, and scalp. Tight trading range. A broad bull channel. We have a high, a higher low, another high, another higher low. It's also a trading range for most of the day. So traders will buy low, sell high, possibly swing longs, and definitely the bears will scalp. Tight trading range. Broad bull channel. Traders buy low, they sell high, and they take relatively quick profits. Remember, a broad bull channel has higher highs and higher lows, but oftentimes it's mostly sideways. So traders trade it like a trading range. A very tight bull channel. A strong breakout. Traders buy closes. They buy at the market. They buy below bars. They buy bull flags. And then enter the trading range. Big up, big down, big confusion. So probably sideways. Traders will buy low, sell high, and scalp. Small pullback bull trend day. Very strong sell off. Sell the close sell off on the open. And then we got a micro double bottom. And reversal up. And a strong breakout. And then we had a small pullback bull trend. Again, in a small pullback bull trend, traders are only going to buy. When you look at any one of these days, it's hard to tell simply looking at the day that it's part of a broad bull channel. That's because a lot of times you can only see a broad bull channel if you look at a lot of bars. A hundred or two hundred bars. If you're looking at a five minute chart on the screen, typically you're looking at about a hundred bars. And most of the time broad bull channels are not clear unless you look at several days of trading and not just one day of trading. Or you can look at a higher timeframe chart. A higher timeframe chart, a broad bull channel on the five minute chart, is probably going to be a relatively tight channel on the 15 minute or 60 minute chart. But in either case, it'll be a bull trend. Most day traders are aware that the market is trending up for the past several days in a broad bull channel. However, they trade each day as it unfolds. And that means sometimes you'll have a bear swing and they'll trade it short, even though the past two or three days might be in a bull trend. If you do see that the market is trending up for three, four or five days, then you look at the five minute chart today. It's better to focus on buy setups because the odds are the trend of the past three, four or five days will continue today as well. And that means it'll be easier to make money buying if the market's in a bull trend. Nine days in a broad bull channel. Again, if you're looking at a five minute chart and you're a day trader, you're not going to be paying much attention to these nine days. And therefore, you may not be aware that today is actually part of a nine day broad bull channel. If you're a day trader, you're looking at today and you'll be placing your day trades based upon the hundred bars that you have on the screen in front of you, not paying a lot of attention to the two or three hundred bars to the left. If you do look at more days, for example, if you put up a bar chart and compress the bars so that you can see many hundred bars on the chart, you can see that it's a broad bull channel. However, you can do it faster by simply looking at a 60 minute chart or a 15 minute chart. As I said, if you want, you can trade it on a higher timeframe chart. Whether you're looking at a five minute chart or a 15 minute chart, you can tell that the market is forming higher highs, higher lows, and is working higher. And therefore, every time there's a sell off, you'll bet the bear reversal will fail and you'll buy a reversal up. The result is you're buying a pullback, buying a pullback, buying a pullback, pullback, pullback, pullback, pullback. You're betting that the bear reversal will fail. So you buy the reversal up. And that's what you always do in a bull trend. You're always betting that bear reversals will fail. So you look for them to fail and you buy the reversal up. Some traders who trade higher timeframe charts like a 15 minute chart or a 60 minute chart will look at a smaller timeframe chart for a slightly earlier entry. For example, if you were looking at a 60 minute chart or a 15 minute chart, you'd see the bull trend and you'd see the reversal down. You'd bet it will fail and you'll put up a five minute chart to enter above a five minute bar. The same with here or here, instead of waiting to enter above a 60 minute bar, which probably would be a much higher price. Here's a 15 minute chart of that same broad bull channel that I've been showing on the five minute chart. Here it's a trading range. It's a trading range within a broad bull channel, but it's a trading range. And you can trade it like a trading range. You look to buy low, sell high and scalp. Betting that every leg up and down is more likely to continue sideways than become part of a new trend. It's obviously also in a bull trend and you can trade it like a broad bull channel, buy low, use an appropriate stop and then just hold for a swing until it's no longer in a bull channel. You can buy, use an appropriate stop and hold overnight until you either have your profit target met or you think it's no longer in a bull trend. Or you could simply buy every day and then get out at the close. Buy, get out at the end of the day. Buy, get out at the end of the day. Buy, get out at the end of the day. Buy, get out at the end of the day. Or you could simply exit on a reversal down. You buy and it's not quite the end of the day, but you're near the top of the trading range and it's starting to reverse down. Here's a 60 minute chart, the same nine day stretch, but this time it's a 60 minute chart. And the channel is fairly tight. Pullbacks are only lasting a few bars, mostly sideways. And when the market is in a fairly tight channel, it's very difficult to make money selling. If you're trading those nine days on a 60 minute chart, you're only going to be buying. You get a breakout bar and a bull close. You buy the close and you got more follow through here. You have a bull flag, a high wind bull flag. You buy above the high of that bar and the same here. Here you got a bull breakout, strong close. You buy above this bar, a pullback or you can buy the closes. Here you got a reversal down. You have a double bottom bull flag, slightly lower low, but double bottom. And a two bar reversal. You buy at a stop above the reversal. You buy a breakout or you buy the close of the follow through bar. Here you got a triangle, three pushes down, one and then bull bar, two and then bull bar, and then three. You can buy the breakout there. In any case, the important point is on the 60 minute chart, it's a tight channel, even though it's a broad channel on the five and 15 minute charts. If you're trading the 60 minute chart, you're only going to be buying because the channel is tight. After each strong breakout to a new high, you then know this is a major lower high and you raise your stop to just below the bottom of the major leg up. It doesn't matter whether you bought here. Once you see this, your stop goes here. If you bought here and you're still holding long and now the market's up here, the stop goes here. You got to trail your stop up after each strong breakout to a new high. The market's in a trading range here and not a tight channel. You can trade it like a trading range. However, the range is so tight and it's following a bull trend, you're more likely to get trend resumption up than trend reversal down. So a lot of traders would concentrate on only taking the buys and not take the shorts until there's a clear, strong, major trend reversal. This is a lower high, a double top, but I'm not sure that there's enough selling pressure to make this a worthwhile sell. Betting it's a slightly higher high major trend reversal. Too many big bull bars, not enough bear bars. The reversal down probably will fail. When you got a breakout like this, you broke below that low and you're reversed up and you have a good two bar reversal. You got two legs down, one pull back two. Let's say you buy on a stop above this bull bar. It's okay to use a stop here because if this is a resumption of the bull trend and it probably is, it should not fall below this low, below this double bottom. And therefore some traders would use a tight stop even before the strong breakout. These traders buying here as soon as they enter would put their stop here instead of down here. They could use the wider stop, but if this reversal is good, it should not fall below this double bottom. And therefore it's okay to use the tight stop even as soon as the market trades above that bull bar instead of waiting for a strong breakout to a new high. Breakout, you only want to buy. Tight channel, you only want to buy. I talked a little bit about major and minor lows. If you have a major reversal down, you're expecting an opposite trend or possibly a trading range. If you have a minor reversal down, you're expecting a bull flag or a trading range. Most traders will not exit if the market falls below a minor low because the odds are there will be buyers below. On the other hand, if it falls below a major low and a bull trend, then it's no longer a bull trend on that chart, on the chart in front of you. It might still be a bull trend on a higher timeframe chart, but the chart you're looking at is no longer a bull trend. It's now either a bear trend or a trading range. Sometimes in a broad bull channel, you can get legs down that last a lot of bars. And if you're looking at a broad bull channel that has several hundred bars in it, you can often get 30, 40 or 50 bars in a bear swing. In other words, a swing down that lasts several hours. And the market can even be always in short, which means if you sell, you believe it's going at least a little bit lower. Yet, the bear reversal will fail and the bull trend will resume. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on trading broad bull channels. in the previous videos overland both sides of your carne the fish, is similar to a lot of copper problema. I'm Al Brooks credits for that, so see the продムable television starts here.