 I'm Al Brooks, and thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fourth of four videos on candles, setups, and signal bars. I'm first going to talk about what a setup is, and then I'll make a point about weak setups needing more than just the setup alone. Next, I'll move on and talk about second signals. So there's a signal, and then the market did not go very far, and then the signal triggers again a second time. And finally, I'll talk about counter trend trades and how the probability improves if there is a strong signal bar. When you're trading, you often see good looking signal bars. Here's a good looking buy signal bar. Here's another good looking buy signal bar. Well, here's a good looking bear bar, good sell signal bar. And a strong candlestick bar is not enough to take a signal. Here, the traders are being offered good buy signal bars, but we're at the top of a trading range. So the context is not good. Trading range, you want to buy low, not high. In general, markets have inertia, and if they're sideways, chances are they'll continue sideways. So buying at the top, hoping that a breakout will be successful is a low probability bet. Always look to the left. The left is the context. And if the context does not support the trade, then your trade has a low probability of success. More likely, if the market goes above the high of either of these bars, it will only go up for a bar or two, and the trading range will continue. Remember, in the trading range, you want to buy low, and you want to sell high, and traders lack conviction. The one thing they're confident of is that the market's not going to go very far up or down. And because they believe it's not going to go very far, they take quick profits. They scalp. Because most breakout attempts fail when you're in a trading range, buying at the top, even if the leg up is strong, selling at the bottom, even if the leg down is strong, is a low probability bet. You'll probably lose money because the market will probably reverse. For trading range, it's a bad environment for swing trading. By the time you're convinced it's going down, well, guess what? You're selling at the bottom of the range. It's the buy zone. By the time you finally see a strong move up and you think it's going higher, well, you're then in the sell zone. Follow through is probably going to be bad, and the trading range will probably continue. It's better to bet that the market will reverse and that the breakouts will fail than to bet that they will succeed. 80% of breakout attempts within trading ranges fail. So it makes more sense to look for a reversal trade. Here, very good looking bull reversal bar. Another very good looking bull reversal bar, but in a tight trading range at a pair of prior highs. When the market was up here, it sold off. Same price level, sold off. Same price level, failed. Buying despite these two bull signal bars is a low probability bet because the market keeps selling off at this price level. You're buying at the top of a trading range, and you're also buying at the top of a tight trading range within a bigger trading range. Chances are there are more sellers above than buyers. Even though you have a good buy signal bar, you have bad context. Likewise, look at this. We're selling off, and here's a pretty good looking bull signal bar. Here's another pretty good looking bull reversal bar, buy signal bar. But what's the problem? You're in a very tight, bare channel. You look to the left of these bars, and the market's in a very tight, bare channel. Therefore, any reversal, if it reverses at all, will probably be minor. Traders should only be looking to sell, not looking to buy. The context is bad. So a signal bar alone is not a reason to take a trade. Here, we're selling off strongly, and we have a good looking sell signal bar. Maybe it's okay, but trading range price action here. We went down, we went up here. Here's another sell opportunity. Head and shoulders top, bare flag. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. But you're selling at the bottom of a tight trading range. Good looking sell signal bars at the bottom of a trading range. Low probability bet. Likewise, good looking bull bars here. But look to the left. A lot of trading range price action. Where are the consecutive big bull trend bars? We have a couple here. But since then, the bull bars have been small, and they've been followed by bear bars. So betting that this is the start of a bull trend is a low probability bet. Good looking buy signal bars does not mean traders should buy. Look to the left. We're in a tight trading range here, and it's within a larger trading range. It's better to be looking to sell when the market's at the top. Better be looking to buy when it's at the bottom. Strong bull trend. About a 10 bar bull micro channel, another bull micro channel. What are the chances that this reversal is going to lead to an opposite trend or even a profitable trade? The same with here. How many bear bars have there been in the past 15 bars? Three, and they're all small bodies. And the channel up, the bull channel is very tight. These are very low probability shorts. Even though you have a pretty good looking sell signal bar right here. A bear reversal bar. Here you've got a reversal bar. The close below the midpoint of the bar has a small bull body, but a big tail on top. Could be a decent sell signal bar, but the context is terrible. Look at the bars to the left. You should only be looking to buy. Reversals like this will fail within a few bars, become bull flags. The trend will continue up. Here you get a reversal bar and the market went sideways for many, many bars. Third push up here. One, two, three. So it's a wedge top, but tight bull channel. The reversal probably minor and a minor reversal usually leads to a trading range, not a profitable short. Now in a strong bull trend, a lot of times the buy signal bars are not all that good. This is pretty good here. A decent bull bar closing on its high, but look at this. It's a doji after another doji after another doji. And a strong bull trend. A lot of times the buy signal bars are not good. Yet you should still buy them because the trend will continue higher. And a lot of the buy signal bars within bull flags don't look particularly strong. Does not matter. There's still buys. Strong bear trend. Tight bear channel. Pullbacks are only a bar or so. Don't look for reversals because most reversals will fail. So even though you've got a good bull bar here and here you've got a bull reversal bar, it's small compared to the bear bars before it. Look to the left. The bear channel is very tight. Not much in terms of big bull trend bars. Not much buying pressure. A bull bar, a bull reversal bar, not reason enough to buy. These reversals will fail within a few bars and become bear flags. Instead of buying, you should be looking to sell. Now it's a bear trend. And very often the sell signal bars are not particularly good and it's okay to sell. Here we have a doji bar, small bar. However, it's in a very strong bear trend. It's reasonable to sell below, stop above maybe the top of the sell climax. So you sell on a stop below the low of that bar, even though it's not a very good looking sell signal bar. The momentum down will probably continue. The attempt to reverse up will probably fail and lead to a bear flag and another leg down. I mentioned that if there's a weak setup, traders usually need more reasons to enter the trade. Here we have a bull trend and a weak buy signal, a double bottom or simply a pullback from a breakout to a new high. And you can either wait for a stronger looking signal or you can buy and use an appropriate stop and scale in. An expert trader would not hesitate buying above that bar or above this bar. He'd put a stop down here. And if the market went down further, he would buy more. Sometimes you look at a setup and the signal bar is weak, but the context is also weak. And when both the signal bar and the context are weak, the chance of making a profit is low. And you can increase your chances. You can increase the probability by simply waiting for more information. So here we're rallying. We have four consecutive bull bars, a seven bar bull micro channel, eight bar bull micro channel. Do you want to sell below that bar? It's a bad looking sell signal bar. And the context for short is bad. I would not sell below that bull bar. I would wait for, for example, a second signal. Here's the first time down. Now we have an II with a bear bar closing on its low. That is a higher probability sell. So instead of selling below that bull bar, maybe sell below this bear II set up. The second attempt to reverse the breakout above these highs. If you want even higher probability, wait until there's a breakout or follow through and then sell closes. This bar represents bulls giving up. Bulls have bought that close. Disappointed here. Tried to get out break even here. Those that did not finally gave up. So sell that close, sell this close, sell at this high over here. That is a higher probability trade. And I understand the argument. If you sell here or here, your stop is further away. So you're increasing your risk. But whenever you increase your probability, you're always going to have a worse risk reward, which usually means the stop is further away. As I said, you could also wait to sell the close of the follow through bar or even the high of the follow through bar and get short right there. Or even this, a weak reversal, second entry buy, but this is strong enough selling, probably a bear flag and another leg down. Strong bull breakout, strong bull breakout. The market's probably going higher. So we get a breakout, good follow through, breakout, good follow through. The market's always in long. If you had to be in the market, long or short, you would only pick long. The odds are the market's going higher. Strong bull bar on the breakout. And then the next bar is strong as well. That's the follow through bar. Another bull breakout, another follow through bar. It's hard to see, but this little doji has a bull body. And that's important. If you get a follow through bar with a bear body, you have to wonder if the breakout will fail. But here we got a breakout and the follow through bar has a bull body that increases the chances that the market is going higher. So when you see that, you know the probability is the market's going up. Buy for any reason. This whole course is about ways to enter and you can enter on almost any bar, but you have to think about why you're entering. And in a strong bull trend, you can buy closes, you buy the bull close, buy the bull close. You can buy below a bar, betting the reversal down will fail. You can buy a bear close, betting that the bear reversal will fail. I talked about bad signal bars and a bull trend. Here's a bear trend, pretty strong bear trend. And do you want to buy above the high of this bear bar? No, it's a terrible signal bar and the context is bad. The same is true here. Even though it's a second entry buy, it's still a lot of bear bodies and not much in terms of bull bodies. So strong bear trend, buying is a bad idea. And then buying, when the buy signal bar is a bear body is a terrible idea. So you have bad signal bar for a buy, a bear bar. And you have bad context, a bear trend. So we have an eight bar bear micro channel. This bull bar did not get above the high of that bar. So it's still part of the bear micro channel. The odds are very high that the first reversal up will fail. You certainly don't want to buy when you know it's probably going to fail. And you also don't want to buy because it's a terrible looking buy signal bar. You can buy if you start to get a strong reversal up, but this is not enough. You need more. If you're looking to buy and you do not have good context, here we have a strong bear trend, and you do not have a good buy signal bar, the next reason to buy would be if we get a strong breakout. And at that point, you get a higher probability buy. And look what happens here. Bull bar closing on its high. Bad follow through, but still not a bear bar. Bull bar closing on its high. Another bull bar. This is a strong enough reversal up so that even if we sell off again, the worst that the bulls probably get is the trading range, which means even if we sell off again, we'll probably come back to this level. Now it's okay to buy. Buy closes or buy a pullback. The market's always in long somewhere in here. Chances are, even after a pullback, you'll get at least a second leg up. So you buy for any reason. You buy at the market. You buy a close. You buy the close of the follow through bar. You buy the low of the bear reversal bar. 8 bar bull micro channel. First reversal down, probably bought. Becomes a bull flag. A failed bear reversal. Buy above the high of the bull bar here. Simply buy at the market. Right here. Right here. You know the odds are it's going higher. Buy at the market. Stop below the bottom of the bull leg. If you want to allow for the possibility of scaling in, trade small enough so that you can scale in. Buy bull closes. Buy bear closes. Here's a bear bar. But an 8 or 9 bar bull micro channel, the reversal attempt will probably fail. So you can place a market order. As soon as that bar closes, buy at the market. Or you can place a limit order to buy at the low of the bar and get filled on the next bar. We've got a bear reversal bar here for a failed breakout above this high. You can argue low 2 short, low 1, low 2. Seriously, do you want to be selling below that bar? It's a small bar compared to these other bars. So it's a weak cell signal bar, even though it has a bear body. And much more importantly is this. There's a 10 or a 15 bar bull micro channel. So the probability of a successful short here is bad. You have a bad signal and you have bad context. To the left, too many bull bars, no bear bars. It still can reverse, but the probability is low. So when you have a bad sell signal bar and bad context for short, it can go down, but you need higher probability. The third thing that the market can do is reverse down. And if you get that, then you can look to sell after you see the reversal. 14 bar bull micro channel, bad context for a short. Higher probability for the bears to wait for a strong reversal down before selling. And that's what we have. Not a strong reversal down here. It's a bull flag. But then we have a bear breakout below the bull flag. And we have a bear follow through bar. Now we have four consecutive bear bars. Now the probability is this is strong enough selling. First reversal up will be sold and there'll be at least a second leg sideways to down. So now the context is good for the bears. You can either sell the bear breakout. I usually like to wait to see if the next bar, the follow through bar, has a bear close, which this one does. And then sell the close of the follow through bar. Traders will sell closes. They'll sell that close. They'll sell that close. Some traders just keep adding to their positions. Other traders take any of those sells and just hold onto it. Other traders will sell, scalp out, sell, scalp out. Always in short through here. So sell for any reason. Not a strong bear trend, but still a bear trend. First reversal up led to a second leg down. Tried to reverse up again, but very tight bear channel. The reversal is probably minor, which means either a bull leg and a bear channel or a bull leg in a trading range. In either case, the market is probably not going to go very far up. Traders will sell the market. They'll sell above bars. They'll sell bull and bear closes. They'll sell bear closes because it's a bear trend. They'll also sell bull closes because they bet the bull reversal attempts will fail. Now, I also want to talk about second signals. Sometimes the context is good enough for a trade, but the signal bar is not strong enough, or maybe the context is not quite good enough. In that case, a lot of times it's better to wait to see if there's a second signal. Here we have a decent bull trend, decent follow through. Bear bar, bear bar, bear bar. Wedge, one, two, three, and a bull breakout above the wedge. Chances are it'll fail. Is that a good short? I think it's not all that good. However, in a situation like this where you've got a wedge increases the chances you get some kind of a pullback. You have a couple of bear bars on the way up. You have a good looking sell signal bar here. It makes me think we're trying to get a pullback, but I'd like to see one more sell signal before I take the short. And that's what we get over here. Another bear bar closing near as low. That is a second signal. And it's a higher probability short than this one. So a lot of traders in a situation like this where the context is not particularly good for a short, even though there's a good sell signal bar, a lot of times they'll wait to see if we get a second signal. So now we have a double top. Bulls buying closes disappointed here. You have to assume they'll try to get out break even, which they did on this bar. And then look at this. The bulls are selling. So we got a micro double top and a bear bar closing near as low. Probably going to go lower. At the bottom, one push down, two pushes down, three pushes down. A double bottom, higher low. Parabolic wedge bottom and a higher low double bottom, but a very tight bear channel. Do I want to buy above this bull bar? Does this bull bar look big enough to reverse these two bigger bear bars? Probably not. I probably would not buy above this bar. The bears tried to resume again, but immediately the bulls got another reversal bar. So buying above this bar is a second entry buy and a higher probability for at least a scalp up. The market's in a trading range and it's near the bottom, but a fairly tight bear channel here. About a five or six, well, maybe six or seven bar bear micro channel. You can argue micro double bottom and it's a buy. Well, it's only a doji bar and maybe a seven or eight bar bull micro channel. In general, if I'm not certain, I wait for a second signal. So there's the first signal. Did not go very far up. The market tried to sell off again, immediately reversed up. A bull bar closing in its high. So this is the second attempt to reverse up. This is a second signal and has a pretty good bicycle bar. So this is a higher probability by above the high of that bar. Whenever there's something wrong with the first signal, just wait for the second signal. The probability then is higher. Do you take profits up here? We have a micro double top up, down, up, down, failed breakout above a trading range, a double top lower high here. So we're probably at the top of a trading range. A lot of traders, if they bought there would exit below that bull inside bar or maybe below that bear bar. Bull trend over here, bull trend, a bear breakout and a higher high. Should you take this as a higher high major trend reversal? Well, a couple of problems. The pattern does not have many bars. The bear bars are not particularly big. So I would not expect much of a reversal down, not much selling pressure. Selling below this bear bar, especially a weak looking bear bar is a low probability bet. Selling below that. Wedge top one, two, three. You got six bar bull micro channel here. No big bear bars here. Not much selling pressure. It's a low probability bet selling below that. Here. Now we have a micro double top. This bar and that bar selling below this bar would be a second entry sell. Bull body, tight trading range, still not a great sell, but the probability of making money selling below this bar is higher than below that bar. If you really want high probability, wait to see if we start to break to the downside and then sell. And that's what we got. After three or four bars down, the market's always in short. Traders believe it's going lower. So if they have to be in the market, they want to be short. They'll look for reasons to sell after this third or fourth bar. They'll sell closes and they'll sell at the market. They'll sell bear closes. They'll sell bull closes. Small bear breakout closed below the low of the past six bars or so. Seven bars. That's good. Bar closing near slow. Good. Next bar has a bear body closing at its middle instead of at the top. It's good to close around or below the middle. Good follow through selling. Traders will start selling closes. They'll sell bull closes, betting that the first reversal up will fail. And they'll sell below bars. Here we have an II with a bear close. So it's a small bear flag and fill. Bull reversal attempt. Traders will place a stop to go short just below this bar and they'll get filled over here. Here we have another attempt at a lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout. Decent bear bars. We have five or six bear bars here. And then the rally, not particularly strong. Not big bull trend bars closing on their highs. Four or five consecutive bull bars. Good. So it's a low probability short, but the context is good. A lower high or a double top major trend reversal. Look how small this bar is. And that's important. So you say, well, Al, I can just short below the low of this bar and put a stop above the high of the bar and my risk will be tiny. Whenever you have a very, very small risk, you should always assume that your great risk reward comes hand in hand with low probability. If you sell below this bar and put a stop just above it, your risk is very small. You'll probably lose money because if you have a great risk reward ratio, chances are the probability of making money is very small. How do you increase your probability? Well, you got a couple of ways. You can wait until there's a reversal down and then sell or simply use a wider stop and especially be willing to scale in higher. So low probability does not mean no probability. It just means the probability is low. Sometimes you get lucky. Big bear breakout closed below the low of at least these five or six bars. I can't see. Maybe it closed below the low of the past 20 or 30 bars. In any case, big bear bar, big bear breakout. And then the follow through bar also has a bare body. At this point, the probability is we'll get at least a small second leg down. This is a low probability short below that bar. Well, after seeing the bear breakout and a bear follow through bar, the probability is now high that we're going lower. Bigger bar. So if you wait to sell down here, yes, you're getting a higher probability of success, but your stop is further away, which means you're increasing your risk reward. And that's okay. I'll take a high probability trade anytime, even though the risk is often greater. The stop is further away. The probability is if I manage my trade well, I'm going to make money. Sell climax and a bull reversal bar and a bull inside bar. Low probability bet. Tail on the top of the buy signal bar. Doji here. Probably minor reversal, which means a bear flag and another leg down. Chances are when you see this, four bear bars, the bodies are increasing in size. We've got a big bear bar here. First reversal up, even with a good buy signal bar. Probably a minor reversal, which means a bear flag that will be followed by another leg down. So if you have any doubt, if you're going to see the bottom of the bar, you're going to see the bottom of the bar. So if you're going to see the bottom of the bar, you're going to see the bottom of the bar. Wait for a second entry. Same with down here. Can you buy this? Well, you got two big bear bars, bigger bodies than that bull reversal bar, tail on top. You can argue two legs down. Big bear breakout. Expect at least a second leg down. Well, you have your second leg down. So maybe we'll reverse now and get up here. But after these two big bear bars and a six or seven bar bear tight channel, that's not a high probability bet. When in doubt, wait for a second entry. What about buying above this doji bar? Still not a very strong buy. You can wait again for another second entry, which would be a third entry. And here you got a good looking buy signal bar closing on its high. You can call it a higher low. You can call it a double bottom with this. You can call it a second entry with this, second entry or third entry with this. In any case, the probability of making money is higher buying here than it is buying above that doji or buying above that bull bar. You enter with a stop just above the high of that bar and a protective stop below and you catch the swing up. Whenever you're trading against a trend, it's always better to have a strong signal bar in your direction. Here we have a strong rally and then a strong sell off. Possibly a double bottom, but this is not a good looking buy signal bar. We have six consecutive bear bars, low probability bet buying on a stop above that bear bar, even though double bottom. But look at this. The bear's got a breakout below the low of the past 40 bars or so. And then it was immediately followed by a bull inside bar closing near its high. Buying above this IOI setup above this bull bar, it's a higher probability. It's a second entry buy. Here's the first entry buy. Not good. We sold off for new low, but the bulls bought it and we ended up with a pretty good looking buy signal bar. Buying above this bar, it's a better looking buy signal bar. Plus it's a second entry buy. So it's a higher probability buy. This is the buy signal. Traders will place a stop just above its high and they'll get long on the next bar if the next bar goes above. And it did. The bulls bought the second entry buy and they got a swing up. Strong bull trend, no bear bar and about 10 bars or so. Do I want to sell below this bar? No. Do I want to sell the second entry below this doji? I personally would not. It's not a strong sell signal bar and the bull channel is still tight. Probably the best the bears get is the trading range. If you're in doubt, it's better not to sell below weak sell signal bars like this bull bar or this doji. There's just not enough selling pressure. Only one bear bar in the past 10 bars. Chances are the best the bears get is sideways and that we'll get another leg up. And we got it. And look what happened. We got the second leg up. Good looking bull reversal. But now we have a bear bar closing on its low. And this bar, it's a higher probability short. Possible final flag wedge. One, two, three. And a decent sell signal bar. It's still not yet high probability, but it's an okay short. And the probability of making money selling below that bear bar getting filled over here is higher probability than selling below that bull bar or this doji. Okay. We've got a bear trend and we have a tight trading range. A tight trading range late and a bear trend often becomes the final bear flag. Also, there's buying pressure. A tail, tail, reversal up. A lot of bull bars in here. That increases the chances that a bear breakout will fail. And maybe this is the failed bear breakout. Slightly lower low, major trend reversal. But only a doji buy signal bar. It has a bear body and it's following a bear bar and another bear bar. And this is a big bear bar closing near its low. So a low probability buy. You don't buy it. You wait. And we've got our bear breakout. We've got a bear breakout here. Another one here. We have a potential final flag and two legs down. And now we have a pretty good looking bull reversal bar. A bull bar and a reversal bar for a possible low. That's the second attempt to reverse the breakout below this low. We broke up below the low. Bad looking reversal. We broke further down and we have a better looking reversal. This probability is higher for the bulls than that one. So it's a better looking buy. Higher probability. Wait to see if we reverse up strongly and then buy later. But this is an okay buy. Probability would be higher buying up here. And you pay for it with a stop further away. That's always the case. In this video, I talked about what a setup is. I also talked about weak setups and the need for additional reasons to buy or sell if the setup is weak. Second signals. Sometimes the first signal is not strong enough given the context. So it's a higher probability trade waiting to see if there's a second signal. And if you're trading counter trend, it's usually better to only take the trade if you have a strong signal bar. I'm Al Brooks and this is the fourth of four videos on candles, setups, and signal bars. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course.