 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on swing trading and scalping. Scalping is not for beginners. In fact, most professional profitable traders do not scalp much at all. They focus on swing trading. However, when the trader does scalp, he has to be aware of minimum scalp sizes. There is a realistic minimum scalp size and you need to be aware of this. Most traders should always be looking for swing trades. Sometimes a swing trade turns into a scalp. Beginners should never look for scalps because it's very difficult to trade them profitably. You need a very high winning percentage and that's just not realistic for a beginner. When a trader is scalping, it's usually easier to make money when you're trading with the trend. Beginners should never trade against a trend even if the trend is weak. Bull trend. If you're going to scalp, it's easier to make money looking for buys. Here we have a small low bottom, a high 2, 1, 2. Strong breakout. Try to reverse down. We have a bull bar. Resumption up. Now we have a pullback to a double bottom and a bull bar. Buy above that. We have a high 2 buy. 1, 2. And it's a double bottom with that low and a higher low. A pullback from this breakout. Now we have a micro double bottom, a second entry buy. A tight trading range. You can look at it as a small triangle, a breakout and a pullback. Two legs down, one pullback, two. So a high 2 bull flag. About a 50% pullback. These are all reasonably high probability trades and they're reasonable scalps. Many very profitable traders who swing trade for the majority of their profit often will take scalps in addition to their swing trading. So for example, on a bull trend, they'll be looking to buy pullbacks, sometimes scalping part, swinging part. When a beginner starts out, he thinks about only one thing. Death. Death of his career. Death of his dream as a trader. He is always focused on risk. And therefore he's drawn to scalps because he knows that with a scalp, the stop can be tight. The risk is therefore small. However, he overlooks a very important variable and that's probability. Unless you can structure a trade with a very high probability, you will lose when you scalp. Beginners are always looking at a trend as overdone, climactic. They're always seeing wedges. One, two, three. One, two, three. They're always looking for tops. They always want to believe that the trend cannot go much further. And because they're only focused on risk, they think, ha, maybe if I sell a reversal, my stop will be tight. My risk will be small and I can make some money. The problem is 80% of reversals fail and therefore looking to sell reversals is a low probability trade. If you have low probability and low reward, you're going to lose money. For example, we have a wedge. One, two, three. Reversing down. We have a failed breakout above a wedge. Reversing down. Here we have a lower high major trend reversal. Here we have a failed breakout above a double top. Here we have a final flag reversal. Here we have a wedge. One, two, three. All of them look logical, except for one thing. It's a small pullback bull trend. The pullbacks are small, which means the reversals down are small. And in general, there's not enough room for a scalp if you're selling with the stop below bars. Some skilled traders might sell with limit orders above bars and scale in. But when you have a small pullback bull trend like this, it's better only to look to buy. On the next higher timeframe chart, this entire trend is a strong breakout. The beginner sells below this bear bar thinking, okay, I'm only risking here. My risk is small. However, small risk always means low probability. And if you have a low probability trade, you need a big reward. If you're scalping, you're going for a small reward. The trade that the beginner is setting up is just destined to fail. Even if he wins 50 or 60% of the time, his reward is going to be no bigger than his risk. And therefore, he will lose money. It's a low probability strategy. It's doomed to fail. Every loss will be at least as big as each winner. And you probably will have more losers than winners, especially when you're trading against a very strong bull trend like this looking to sell. And you'll bleed to death from a thousand paper cuts. Each loss is small, but after you've had three, four, five or six of them, you end up with a pretty big loss. On the other hand, a strong bull trend like this, you should only look to buy. If there's a clear stairs pattern with good size pullbacks, expert traders will trade against the trend selling new highs. Here, that's not the case. We're getting gaps. Gaps mean small pullbacks, small reversals down. And it's very dangerous to trade against a trend that's in a tight channel, small pullbacks and forming gaps. You should only look to buy. You buy the pullbacks betting that the reversal attempts down will fail. This high, that low, a gap. This high, these low, a gap. A gap. This is a small pullback bull trend. And the pullbacks are not big enough for bears to make money, especially looking to sell with stops. When an expert trader looks at this, he sees a strong bull trend and he's only looking to buy. He'll buy for any reason. He'll buy pullbacks. These are all examples of pullback buys. He'll buy below bear bars, betting the reversals down will fail. He'll sell bear closes, betting the reversals will fail. He'll buy at the market. Pullbacks are small. We're getting gaps. Small pullback bull trend. Only look to buy. You can see the reversals down did not go below the breakout points. We're forming gaps. We're forming gaps. When you have a small pullback bull trend and it's getting gaps like this, you cannot make money selling. You might make money on some of the trades, but your losses will be greater than your wins and you will lose money. So even with a small risk, you're going to lose money selling. When there's a stairs pattern, you can make money trading against the trend. In a stairs pattern, a pullback goes above the breakout point. Here we have a reversal up, but did it get above the breakout point? No, we still have a gap. And the pullbacks are very small. This is a pretty good sized bar. It might tempt bulls and to begin to look for buys. But whenever you're getting gaps and the pullbacks are small, lasting only a bar or two, you cannot make money looking to buy. You should only look to sell. Some expert traders will take some scalps, sell scalps in addition to their swing scalps, but they'll only be trading in the direction of the trend. In this case, they'll be selling. Here, this pullback went above this breakout point. And therefore, now we're in a stairs pattern. We're stair stepping down and the pullbacks are overlapping breakout points. When that's the case, expert bull scalpers will look to buy a new low and they're willing to scale in, betting that the pullback from the breakout will rally back above the new low. Once they see a pullback going above the breakout point and they see a weak rally like this, a weak sell-off like this, bare bar doji, bare bar bull bar, bare bar doji. This looks like a bare leg in a trading range. Some expert traders will place a limit order to buy at that low looking for a scalp. We went back above the breakout point. They'll do it again on the next leg down. They'll place a limit order to buy at that low. If it goes lower, they'll buy more lower and they're looking for just a scalp. They buy, they take a scalp profit. They buy, they take a scalp profit. In general, they're going to be looking to exit somewhere in the middle of the prior bare leg, because that's where the bear traders will be selling. Whenever you're in a bear trend that's stair stepping down, bears will look to sell around a 50% pullback from the last leg down. A scalp means a small profit. We're in a bear trend. We have consecutive bear bars here. A big bar, climactic, might not be much more down, but it's okay to sell the close looking for a scalp. And this would be your minimum scalp, maybe a couple points. You exit two points down from that close. When a trader sees this, he correctly assumes the market's going to go at least a little bit lower, and therefore he can sell for a scalp. Two legs up, one pullback, two. 50% pullback of this breakout. Traders will sell below that bear bar, at least for a scalp. Knowing that this is fairly climactic, maybe we'll enter a trading range. Maybe there's not much more down. We have a strong bull reversal, and the bar after it has a bull body. That is good follow-through buying, and therefore the odds are we'll go up at least a little bit higher. Bulls will buy that close looking for a scalp. We have a fifth bull bar, but it's the second follow-through bar. And the bears are trying to reverse down. A failed breakout above this high. A double top with the top of that sell climax. Chances are buyers below, and at least a little bit more up. So traders will buy with a limit order at the low of that bull bar, and they'll get filled here, and they scalp out here. It looks easy, but the reality is most traders cannot do this. They'll make too many mistakes, and they'll end up losing money. If you can do it flawlessly, if you're an expert trader, sure, you can do this. But if you're starting out, this is not the way to trade. You'll make too many mistakes, and to make money, you need a very high probability of success, and that means you cannot make mistakes. Remember, a scalp, you're going for a small profit. Some traders will use wide stops and scale in. So for example, a bull might buy this low and put a stop down here, betting that either it's going to be the start of a bull trend or the start of a trading range. If it's the start of a trading range, we could get a very deep pullback, but it should stay above this low. He might buy for any reason up here, use a stop down here, and he's willing to scale in lower. If you use a very tight stop, then your risk is very small. Since your reward is also small, you need a very high probability of success, like a 90% probability of winning, and beginners simply cannot trade that well. Another problem with a tight stop is that the probability is not going to be very high. In general, the tighter the stop, the smaller the risk, the lower the probability. And that's a problem when you're scalping, because you need high probability to make money. Tight stops when you're scalping, in general, it's a bad idea. If you are scalping, it's better to use a wider stop and trade small enough so that you can scale in. That increases your probability, and it makes up for the low reward. I want to talk a little bit about what the realistic minimum profit target is when you're scalping. There is a realistic minimum size when you're scalping. If you scalp for a profit that's very, very small, commissions, slippage, mistakes will make it impossible to make money. I have several guidelines that I use to determine what's the smallest scalp I will try to get in any particular market. For the E-mini and bond futures, I only scalp for at least 4 to 8 ticks. Trading in the Forex market, and I think a trade will probably make 5 or 6 pips, I will not take that trade if that's all I think it will make. I will only take the trade if I think there's a realistic chance of making 10 to 20 pips. For stocks and commodities, the smallest trade that I'll ever take is 10 to 20 ticks. I sometimes end up exiting with less than that, but I do not take a trade unless I plan on taking that much. If after I enter, I think my premise is wrong, I'll get out. And sometimes I'll get out with 2 or 3 ticks profit or 2 or 3 ticks loss. But as soon as I think my premise is wrong, I get out. Another guideline is, if I'm scalping, my minimum trade has to be at least 5 to 10% of an average day's range. For example, if I'm trading a Forex market and the average day's range is 100 pips, I do not want to be scalping for anything less than 10 pips. That's already my minimum for Forex markets as well. When I'm scalping on a 5 minute chart, for example in the E-mini, the average bar is only 1 or 2 points tall. And I scalp for 1 or 2 points and I hold for 1 to 5 bars. Sometimes I'll hold longer, sometimes I'll turn a scalp into a swing trade or part of the trade into a swing trade. But my general expectation when I'm scalping on a 5 minute E-mini chart is to get out with a 1 to 2 point profit. And I usually get out within 1 to 5 bars. Rarely, if you're trading the E-mini, you'll get a lot of bars that are 5 points tall or more. When that's the case, I'm not scalping for 1 point, I'm scalping for 5 points. I want to be scalping for about the size of the average bar. If the actual risk is small, if the bars are small and the legs are small, like on this particular day, I think scalping for 1 to 2 points is fine. If you are a scalper, most traders should not scalp. It'll be too hard to make money. It's certainly too hard to make money for a career. And you have to make sure that it's compatible with your personality. Will you enjoy it? If you don't enjoy it, don't do it. When you're looking at a chart and you're not sure what the minimum scalp size is, make sure that it is at least as big as the height of average recent bars, and at least 5 to 10% as big as the average daily range. In this particular chart, the average bars are about 20 ticks tall. And the average daily range has been about 100 ticks. Here, a reasonable minimum scalp would therefore be about 10 ticks. In general, I prefer traders to lean toward more swing trading. You have two choices here. The recent bars are 20 ticks tall. 10% of the average daily range is 10 ticks. I think it's better to probably try to go for the larger of the two minimums, which is 20 ticks if you're looking to scalp this chart. Part of the reason for that is if the bars are 20 ticks tall, your stop is probably going to be at least 20 ticks away, and you want to be going for a reward that is at least as big as your risk. I have some exceptions. For example, in the E-mini, I usually scalp for 4 ticks unless the range is relatively big and the bars are relatively big, then I'll scalp for 2 points. In the NASDAQ, 2 to 4 points is the minimum scalp, and for the bonds, bond futures, 4 to 8 ticks is the minimum scalp. And it depends on how big the bars are. If the bars are bigger, you go for the bigger target. If the bars are smaller, you go for the smaller target. This is a 5-minute chart of the Euro versus the dollar, and here are a couple of scalps. Buying the reversal up, and here's a minimum scalp. A bull flag buying the breakout. Here's the minimum scalp. If your son or daughter is in college, you know the minimum grade to graduate is a D. Would you be happy if your son proudly told you that his goal in life was to get a D or to make a minimum wage? Of course not. And the same is true with trading. Going for the minimum is rarely ever the best choice. Successful traders who take 10-pip scalps, they do it only when it's appropriate. And many days in the Forex markets, the markets are in fairly tight ranges, and if you're going to trade, the only way to make money is by scalping. Most traders should not trade when that is their only option. It's too hard to do it. Plus, most people do not have a personality that's compatible with scalping. They get stressed out. They feel too unhappy. This is very important. I've never met a trader who is making a living only going for minimum scalps. I know a lot of very profitable scalpers. I've met a lot of profitable scalpers over my 30 years. However, they do that as part of their overall plan, and they go for more than minimum scalps on most of their trades. In other words, they'll go for bigger scalps. So instead of one point in the E-mini, they'll go for two or three points. Instead of 10 pips in the Forex markets, they'll go for 20 or 30 pips. Or they'll swing trade. You should never try to make a living only going for minimum scalps because you will not succeed. I mentioned some of the problems with this earlier. There's a spread that you have to overcome. Some Forex brokers charge commissions. There's also slippage. And the mistakes become a real big problem. And everybody makes mistakes. Also, there are problems with the brokers and fills. The result is that you need to win 90% of the trades consistently for years if you're trying to make a living going for minimum scalps. There are traders who can do that, but you should assume that you are not one. It's a very rare trader who can do that and who is happy doing it. You need both. You have to be happy as a trader because you're trying to do this for a career. And your job has to be fun. Again, I know traders who win 90% of the time. That immediately tells you that they're scalpers. If you're winning 90% of the time, you have to be going for a low reward. Because a high probability of success means a bad risk-reward ratio. And that means that you're scalping. You're going for very little reward. However, that does not mean they're going for minimum profits. For example, in the euro versus a dollar, they may be scalping, but they might be trying for 20 or 30 pips on their scalps. If you restrict yourself to only taking 10 pip scalps, you could theoretically be profitable. The old poor rotter was for many, many years, but it's unrealistic. Most people who try to make a living with simply 10 pip scalps will not be successful. Also, you have to be doing it successfully day after day, year after year. And you have to be happy doing it. I was an eye surgeon for many years. And I was very good at it. And I made a lot of money doing it. But I was not happy. So I stopped doing it. And if you're a scalper, it doesn't matter if you're very good at it. If you're not happy, you're not going to want to do it for the rest of your life. You not only have to be good, but you have to be happy. Very few traders have both of those things in their favor. I've been talking about the profit target, a scalp, and probability. But there's a third variable in the trader's equation, and that is risk. If you're trading a forex market like the euro versus the dollar, you can usually use a 20 pip stock. But sometimes the bars are big and the swings are big. A 20 pip stock may not be reasonable. You have to win 90% or more of your trades to overcome the risk that you need to trade profitably. And that's just not realistic. It's possible, but very few traders can do it and can do it happily. When the bars are bigger, especially when there are a lot of reversals, a trader needs to use wider stops or win 90% of the time. Otherwise he's going to lose. And since winning 90% of the time is very difficult to do, a scalper usually needs wider stops. And usually they have to scale in if they're going to be consistently profitable. If you cannot use the appropriate stop for whatever reason, if you're scared, if your account size is too small, just wait for a trade that would allow you to use the right stop. One of the problems going for minimum reward is when the bars are big, your risk is big. And even if you're winning 70% of the time, at the end of the day, you see your account is either break even or even losing money. And you're asking yourself, gosh, I won 70% of my trades today and I did not make any money. And the problem is risk. If the risk is big and you're going for too small of a profit, that's the result. You're going to end up having a very difficult time making money. This is a 60 minute chart of the E-mini. The average bar on a 60 minute chart might be about five points. And therefore, if you're looking to scalp on a 60 minute chart, you should be going for about five points and you should expect to exit within one to five bars. Five bars on a 60 minute chart is five hours. It's still a scalp. Strong bull breakout and follow through. You can buy the close of the second big bull trend bar or the close of the bar afterwards. Place a limit order to get out with a five point profit, a stop below. Your reward is much smaller than your risk, but the probability of the market going up at least a little bit is high. We have a triangle. You can call it a wedge. Three pushes down. One, two or two. And then three. Trying to reverse up here. A triangle is a breakout mode situation. And that means there's only a 50% chance that a breakout will be successful. If you buy above the high of this bull bar, only a 50% chance it's going to go up high enough for you to make a profitable trade. And 50% chance it will not. It will either continue sideways or it will reverse. It looks like a good buy. A wedge one, two, three, four. A good looking bull bar. Triangle. You're buying above its high. Yet you lost immediately on the very next bar. On your entry bar you lost. Now we have two consecutive bear bars. Probably going lower. Scalpers will sell that close and look to scalp out. I call this bar a give up bar. Or this bar as well. It went below the low of this buy signal bar. And these two bars are caused by bulls giving up. And when you have trapped bulls like that, there's a 60% chance you'll get at least a small second leg down. And therefore selling this close is a high probability trade that you'll get at least a small profit. And therefore it's a high probability scalp. This is a five minute chart of the e-mini. Let's say you bought this close and you decided to exit with a two tick profit. High probability of making two ticks. And it's very high probability that you'll make two ticks. But what's the problem with that? One of the problems is commissions. Commissions in general are relatively small. But if the profit target is small as well, then the commissions can be relatively big. Let's say your broker charges you a $4 commission for around churn. $2 to buy, $2 to sell. And then let's say you go for a two tick scalp. Two ticks in the e-mini is a $25 profit. Here you buy that close, you exit with two ticks, you made $25. But you had to pay a $4 commission. And therefore your net profit was $21. On the other hand, let's say you used a two tick stop. And the market went down and hit your stop before it hit your profit target. Instead of winning $25, you lose $25. You still have that $4 commission. So every time you lose, you lose $29. Every time you win, you win $21. That reward is much smaller than your risk. How can you make money doing that? You need a really high winning percentage, well over 90%. And that's simply unrealistic. Let's say you took 10 trades and you won 60% of the time. Since you're winning $21 for every win on two tick scalps, your net profit would be $126. And you lost only four times. But you're losing $29 in each loss. And your total loss is $116 from your four losers. If you're right even 60% of the time, there's no margin for error. You're barely making a profit. You have to be right 80 to 90% of the time to make a living. And that's just unrealistic. Going for a two tick scalp is just not worth doing. You cannot do it profitably. And that's why I say there's a realistic minimum scalp size. And for the E-mini, the realistic minimum is one point, maybe two points. Here's a 60 minute chart of the Euro versus the dollar. The average bar on the 60 minute chart is about 50 pips. And therefore, a scalp is 50 pips. 50 pips or more. For example, if you buy this failed bear breakout, it's a higher low. And exit with 50 pips, you're exiting right here. And that's a good location. You're at the top of a possible trading range. For the bears, they see a double top at the top of a trading range. Maybe a lower high versus this high. They have a strong bear breakout. They see this as a pullback from that strong bear breakout. It does not matter that this is a little bit above that. It's still a two-legged pullback from this bear breakout. And you have a good bear bar. A low two short, low one, low two. Either in a trading range or possibly in a bear trend. A double top, lower high. It might be the start of a bear trend. Some traders will sell below the low of that bear bar. And they'll get filled right here. If they're a scalper, they'll place a limit order to buy back their shorts 50 pips down, which is right here. A good location near the bottom of a possible trading range. A big bear breakout, probably going to get at least a couple legs down. A good location. Traders might sell below the low of that bull bar or below the low of the spare bar. A second entry short. And exit with a 50 pip profit down here. This is a five-minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. And let's say you're thinking about scalping for six pips using 100,000 units. Some brokers charge commissions. All brokers require you to pay a bid-ask spread. Most of the time, the cost is relatively small. However, if the profit target is also small, like six pips, then the commission becomes relatively big. Suppose you're risking six pips to make six pips and you're trading 100,000 units. And let's say your broker has a bid-ask spread of two pips each way. Then you need an eight pip move to make six pips. You need your six pips profit. And then you have two pips bid-ask spread buying and two pips bid-ask spread selling. And therefore you need an eight pip move to make six pips. If you win on six of your ten trades, each win is six pips times $10 a pip, you made $60. Each loser is eight pips, not just six pips, because you have your two pip bid-ask spread buying and again selling. And that means your average loser is going to be about $80. The average winner is $60. And let's say you take ten trades and you win six pips. You win six pips. You win six trades. You win six trades. Your average win is $6. So you make $360 from the winners. But your average loss is $80 times four losers. So you lost $320 from your losers. Even though you won 60% of the time, you lost money. There's no margin for mistakes when you're going for a reward that's too small. You need a success rate of 90% to make a living. And that's unrealistic. Plus you have to be happy. And that's very hard to do. And therefore, there is a minimum scalp size and you should never be scalping for less than 10 pips, preferably less than 20 pips. And most traders should not be scalping for a living. They should be swing trading. Sometimes the market is very quiet and the only way to make money in a particular day is to scalp. And that's okay. It's important to understand that scalping is not for beginners. In fact, most traders should swing trade and rarely scalp. If a trader does scalp, he should not scalp for a size that's too small. Otherwise, the cost of commission, slippage, and spreads, and mistakes become too great. And it becomes impossible to profitably trade unless you win 90% or more of your trades. And that's simply unrealistic. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on swing trading and scalping. As long to see, in Ctr cambio presents. The power tenga built into the future. Which experience is,eza acids are very secure. The next bit of an oxygen髪.emente