 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading tight bear channels. I want to make an important point in this video, and that is that if the market's in a bear trend, especially a strong bear trend like a breakout or a tight bear channel, reversals are usually minor, which means they usually lead to bear flags or possibly trading ranges, but the odds are the bear trend will continue. At some point in here, everyone agrees that the market is in a tight bear channel. In other words, a bear trend. The market keeps trying to reverse and every reversal is followed by lower prices. That means every reversal is either a trading range or a bear flag. And traders should be looking to sell reversals, not buy reversals. Even if a seller happened to sell the lowest close in the trend at this point, the risk of losing money is small if he manages his trade well. By managing a trade, I mean using an appropriate stop. And the probability of making money is higher if a trader can scale in. Because any reversal is probably going to be minor and lead to a test back down to the lower the bear trend. If a trader were to sell here, he would put a stop above the most recent major lower high. And this is a major lower high. We have a series of bear bars and a new low. Is this a major lower high? I don't know. It's not that dramatic. There's not much selling as three bear bars. If you did put a stop here, I think it's probably a minor high and you can see the market went above it over here. Yet the bear trend resumed. Whenever you have a strong bear trend, in this case a very tight bear channel, the market usually has to become a trading range before the bulls have a chance at reversing it, creating a major trend reversal into a bull trend. And therefore, there's very little probability that an appropriate stop is going to get hit. Most reversal attempts fail. Try to reverse, try to reverse, try to reverse. Did not hit the stops. As I said, I think this is a fairly minor lower high. The rally is not all that strong. The sell-off is just a few bars. They're not particularly big. We have bigger bars here, here, here. Therefore, this might lead to a trading range or a bear flag, but probably not a bull trend. You can see this rally broke above the top of the bear channel, but it's only a few bars at this point. At this point, it's maybe six or seven bars and not particularly strong. Therefore, if we form a higher low, especially if the higher low comes from only four bars down, it's probably part of a trading range and not a major trend reversal. The bulls tried three times to reverse the bear trend. And none of the reversals was enough to convert the trend to always in long. It remained always in short. And therefore, you can look at this as a trading range or as a bear flag. Usually, if it's just a few bars, I call it a pullback, a bear flag. And here we have two legs up. It's still probably a pullback, a bear flag. Once it gets to be about 20 bars, I tend to use the term trading range. However, the odds still favor trend resumption down rather than trend reversal up. There's just not much buying pressure. The rallies are just not strong enough to make traders believe that the bulls actually can take control and create a bull trend. No clear major trend reversal pattern and no wedge bottom, which often leads to a major reversal. Therefore, only a 30% chance that any one of these reversals will lead to a bull trend. 70% chance the reversals will be minor and lead to bull legs in trading ranges or simply become bear flags. Bear flag. Here it's a bear flag. Still probably a bigger bear flag like a double top bear flag. At this point, I would call it the trading range, but not much buying pressure and still not enough bars to make the probability the same for the bulls as it is for the bears. The probability still favors trend resumption down. A reasonably strong bear breakout to a new low. A series of four bear bars. One of them is pretty big. I would call this a major lower high. As long as the trend is continuing to make major lower highs, the trend is in effect. If the market starts to go above major lower highs, then it's no longer a bear trend. It's then either a trading range or possibly a bull trend. As I said, we have a new low and three bear bars, but they're not particularly big compared to the prior breakouts. And therefore, this is not a major lower high. It's a minor lower high. And that increases the chances that we're going to go sideways. This is an acceptable stop just a little bit above the top of this lower high. If you get stopped out and the market remains always in short, you look to sell again either here or here. In general, if the market's always in short and it rallies, and let's say you exit for any reason. Let's say you exited above this bull bar after a lower low. It's still always in short after these six bars, seven bars. And therefore, always in bears will look to sell again below a bear bar that closes below its low. That would be below this bar and then we get filled right here. A lot of bears prefer to use the top of a major lower high for their stock. And some of these bears, if they sell here and they see the market rally for six bars, seven bars, they'll add on. They'll sell more. They'll look to sell below a bear bar and get filled here. They'll take the second entry as long as it's at least two or three times bigger than the minimum scalp. In the E-mini, a minimum scalp is one point. And therefore, the bears will sell more below the bear bar if the second entry is two or three points above the first. Sometimes it's five or six or seven points above the first. But as long as the stock has not been hit, traders will add on. The goal is to get out break even at their original entry. And then with the profit that is at least as big as the minimum scalp on their second entry. It has to fall below that first entry to get filled. So most of the bears who sold this close and or below this bear bar did not get filled here. It hit their limit order price but did not fill. A lot of those bears would then get out above the bull reversal bar where possible. Double bottom, higher low. Even though it's still probably minor. Not enough bars down for a major reversal. A lot of the bears will get out. And then look to sell again below another bear bar, for example, here. You do not have to get out here because this is still a minor reversal. Seven bars up, not moving up all that far. Not consecutive big bull trend bars. Not much buying pressure. And then the test of the low is only three or four bars. And that's usually not enough for a major pattern. It's usually too small for a major trend reversal. Usually it's a minor reversal in a trading range. However, it's reasonable to get out because there's probably better than a 30% chance that we're going a lot higher. And then you can always sell again when the bear trend resumes, if it resumes. Very tight bear channel. And on the next higher timeframe, a 15 minute chart or a 30 or 60 minute chart, it's probably just a series of bear bars closing on or near their lows. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Very strong bear trend. The pullbacks are all very small and only a few bars. Traders should trade it like a breakout. Only sell. You cannot make money buying when a trend is this small and the pullbacks are this small. You can argue that we're in a trading range here, but once you have a decent sized breakout with a decent follow through bar, a bear bar closing near its low, the market's probably going down for at least a measured move and possibly a bear trend for the remainder of the day. The market's always in short. The odds are it's going at least a little bit lower. The market's always in the market. How do you enter? The simplest thing to do is right around the close of that bar, either a few seconds before or a few seconds later, you just hit sell the market and put your stop just above the top of the sell climax or maybe above this lower high. You can also sell above any bar, betting that reversal attempts will be minor and they'll fail. And anytime you see a bull close and attempt to reverse the trend, the channel is very tight. The reversal attempts almost certainly fail and therefore you can sell bull closes. Or if you prefer stop entries, you see a reversal attempt like this and you see bad follow through, a bear bar on the next bar, place a stop order to go short just below its low, right here. Another bull breakout attempt and then a bear bar, you sell on a stop right below its low. You get filled right here. The bulls who bought see that they're not getting consecutive big bull trend bars breaking far above the top of the bear channel. They have a second attempt here and the bear trend is resuming a second time here. The bear trend tried to resume here. The bulls got one more leg up. If the bear trend is resuming a second time, usually the bulls give up. And that's one of the reasons why low two shorts are so reliable in strong bear trends. Where do you put the stop? Is it reasonable to put your stop right above the breakout? Well, if this is going to be the start of a bear trend, it should not go above the top of this two bar bear breakout. And therefore it's reasonable to use the tight stop or even a tight stop here. The most recent major lower high is probably here, the start of the bear trend. But these are reasonable. In general, any reasonable stop is good. And if you take this trade 10 times using a tight stop versus using a wider stop, your total profit will be about the same. You'll lose more often with the tighter stop. However, the few times you do lose with the wider stop will be about the same as the total losses from the tighter stop. Any reasonable stop is appropriate. And if you're looking at the lower price, you'll see the lower price. Once you decide that the market's always in short, then you believe the market is going down. And that means you have to get short, at least a small position. And as I said, the easiest way to get short is simply sell at the market. We have a pullback. And once you have a pullback, the market is then in a channel phase. We have a bear micro channel, no pullback here for about seven or eight bars, fairly tight channel. And now we're reversing up. The first pullback will almost certainly fail and the market will go at least a little bit lower. Once you get a pullback in any kind of a breakout, here we have a strong bear breakout and still follow through, no pullback through these three bars. Now we got a pullback. So for me, that's the start of a channel phase. Obviously the channel began up here. We have a breakout in the channel and then another pullback. So we have a breakout here and then a resumption of the bear channel. We had a bear channel and then a bear breakout. And now the channel phase is resuming again. Another bear breakout, strong enough so that we'll probably get at least a small second leg down. And we obviously got another 50 or 60 bars down. Again, if a trader is flat and he did not go short, he can sell the close of that bear bar. We have a bear breakout bar closing below its midpoint. And then we have a second bear bar closing on its low. It's in general not best to sell at the bottom of any channel, but it's reasonable. This is a very tight bear channel. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe. The odds are we're going lower. Again, the easiest way to enter if you're flat and you're wondering what to do, you find out where your stop is. And that determines your risk and that tells you what position size you can take and just trade small and sell at the market. Either you can wait for this bar to close near as low and then just sell at the market and get filled on the next bar, the open of the next bar. Or just sell a second or two before this bar closes. Whenever the market's in a bear trend, one of the first things I always look at is whether or not the limit order bulls can make money. If a bull buys at a prior low and scales in lower, will the rally go above the breakout point? That would allow him to get out break even on his first entry and then with the scalper's profit on his lower entry. And look, we have a gap. And here we have another gap. This market is not allowing limit order bulls to make money. And therefore it's a very tight bear trend. It's a small pullback bear trend. And the odds are it's going lower. However, once the bulls can start to make money, then I call it a stairs pattern. And that increases the chances that the market will soon evolve into a trading range. Whenever there's a breakout and then a bar trades above the height of the prior bar, that's a pullback. And I always assume that the market is in the early part of a channel. If there are stairs, in other words, breakouts that pull back beyond breakout points, that is another sign of two-sided trading. And instead of a breakout, which is one-sided, the market now has some two-sided trading. It's probably in a channel. Here we have a breakout below this low. And the top of this pullback is above the breakout point, that low. And therefore, this is a stair step down. That's a good sign that the breakout phase has ended and the market is now in a channel. This pullback is not enough for limit order bulls to be buying. This channel is still far too tight. And bulls should not be buying. However, it's one sign that the breakout phase has ended and the channel phase has begun. So, whenever you look at a chart and you believe it's a trend, for example, somewhere in here, you have to conclude that the market's in a bear trend. Then you know that there's a 60% chance or more that the market will go lower, at least a little bit lower. Whenever you look at it, you say, well, where are all the big bear bars? These bear bars are fairly small. The market keeps reversing. Maybe it's not really a bear trend. Maybe it's a bear leg and what will become a trading range. However, you look at how tight it is and you can see a gap between this low and that high. And then we get gaps between this high and this low. The market is strongly bearish. You know it's going lower. It never feels like 60 or 70% chance of making money. But when a bear channel is this tight, it is 60 to 70% chance of making money, entering at any time for any reason using the appropriate stock. Here we've got three consecutive bull bars. Maybe the trend is reversing. No, the channel is still very tight and therefore any reversal, even three consecutive bull bars is most likely minor. And it will be followed by a resumption of the bear trend. When you're watching this real time, it's easy to get frightened. Oh my gosh, I'm short and it's going to take my money. It's going to hit my stock. Well, the reality is the odds of that are small. Any reversal is minor. Until after there's a big minor reversal, the odds of the market converting into a trading range or a bull trend are small. What about the probability for the bears? I said the probability is high that it's going lower. Well, when you start having pullbacks like this, the probability of lower prices is not quite as high as when you have a strong breakout. However, it's still very high. Also, because of the pullbacks, there's less time pressure that gives you more opportunity to trade. In other words, do I sell here or do I wait a few bars? It doesn't matter. You can wait a few bars and see that a couple of legs up are not reversing the trend. Then you can sell a low too short below that bear bar. No matter where you short, if you're trading this on a higher timeframe chart and you see that it's a breakout, no pullbacks, your stop is up here. If you're trading it on the five minute chart, your stop might be there or here. So the risk is about the same as for a breakout. The reward usually a little bit less because you're getting pullbacks and that means the trend is a little bit weaker. However, the risk reward is still good and the probability is still good and traders should short. The biggest problem that you have is the evolution of a channel into a trading range. Yet even the first reversal up, if it's very strong, it's still minor, which means you'll still probably get a chest down and the bulls will probably need a major trend reversal. Some kind of a double bottom here. Here it's a higher low, could be a lower low. And at this point, we don't know if it's going to lead to a major reversal. However, this is such a strong bull breakout that the odds are we're going to get a test back up here and the bear channel has now evolved into a trading range. Trading range means it goes up, it goes down, and then it tries to go up again. Whenever you have a bear channel, there's a 75% chance that eventually you'll get a bull breakout and the market evolves into a trading range. 25% chance you'll get a strong bear breakout and then an even stronger bear trend starting the market cycle over again. Bear breakout and then channel down. Once you look at this chart at the end of the day and ask yourself, where did the trading range begin? You say, well, it's actually been sideways for a whole bunch of bars, like 60 or 70 bars. It's still in a bear trend, still in a bear channel. But once you have this strong rally and then you see it going sideways here, you look back and you'll discover that actually it was also in a trading range here. And even though this is still part of the bear channel, this part of the bear channel was a bear leg and what became a trading range. We have a breakout to a new low, just lasted one bar, and then you get a pullback. As trends go on, they tend to become weaker and they tend to evolve into trading ranges. And there are signs that the process might be beginning. For example, if the breakout just lasts one bar and then we're starting to get a bounce, it might be weakening and might soon evolve into a trading range. If limit order bulls buying at that low and scaling in lower can make money, does this pullback go above the breakout point? That's another sign that it might be evolving into a trading range. A brief breakout, again, brief breakout and another reversal. So these are all signs that the market might be evolving from a channel into a trading range. The bears are starting to see bars with fairly conspicuous tails on the bottom. And that means at the end of the bar, traders are buying. That makes it likely that the bears are getting weaker and the bulls are getting stronger and the market might be evolving into a trading range. Also, you look at the follow through, you get a series of bear bars and you start getting bull bars after the bear bars. Here you get a bear bar and then a bull bar reversing it. A bear bar and then another reversal. A bear bar and then a doji and a bull bar. A bear bar, another reversal. Traders are starting to buy after the close of strong bear bars. Instead of selling and getting consecutive bear bars, they're starting to buy. That means traders are buying low and that's one of the signs of a trading range. Buy low. Bear bars, not particularly big. So instead of a series of big bear bars, we were getting bigger bear bars here earlier in the trend during the breakout phase. Now we're getting a series of bear bars, but they're not quite as big. Also, they're shrinking. Look at this body, a little bit smaller, a little bit smaller, and now even a bull body. Lack of momentum as the market's getting lower. Lack of interest in selling as the market's going lower. Lack of consecutive big bear bars. Big bear bar and then a doji bar. Big bear bar and then a doji bar. Instead of a big bear bar and then a bear bar. All through here, it's still a strong bear trend, and you can sell the same setups that you would during a breakout. You can sell at the market. You can sell bear closes. You can sell bull closes. The odds are high that we're going lower. lower. However, as it begins to weaken and becomes more two-sided, traders start to sell only rallies instead of at the market, even at new lows. So what's the big difference between a very strong bear trend and a breakout? In a breakout, traders will sell at prior lows, betting that we're going lower. In a channel, they start to buy at prior lows to take profits and then sell rallies around the midpoint of the prior bear leg. So once the trend starts to weaken, instead of just selling at new lows or at any time, traders prefer only to sell pullbacks. Instead of selling as the market's going down and breaking out to new low, it's bouncing. So traders are starting to take partial profits at new lows. When the range is fairly big, the bears don't necessarily take profits at the prior low. They might take profits one, two, or three points below the prior low. However, the bears are still buying at the low. And the result is you get a rally that goes above the prior low. The bears do not want to sell down here. They want to take profits here. The bears want to sell higher. So there's nobody to sell here. The bears are buying, the bulls are buying, and the result is a rally. It's still a bear trend. And therefore, the bulls are unwilling to hold on to longs. They're buying and scalping. They're buying down here, scaling in lower and taking profits up here. And the bears are selling somewhere in the middle of the most recent bear leg. So down here, bulls and bears are buying. And then up here, both bulls and bears are selling. The bulls are selling out of longs and the bears are selling back into shorts. Down here, bears are buying out of their shorts to take profits and the bulls are trying to buy for a scalp up. That's a sign that a channel is transitioning into a trading range. Earlier on, when the channel is very tight, any bull buying at the prior low with a limit order is failing to make money. That's a sign of a fairly strong bear trend. If bull scalpers cannot make money buying at prior lows and scaling in lower, that means the market is very strongly bearish and probably going lower. When the channel is very tight like this, most bulls will not buy. Most of these little pullbacks are caused by bears taking partial profits. I wanted to make the very important point in this video that whenever the market is in a tight bear channel, reversals are minor. That means they become bear flags or maybe small trading ranges, and the odds are high that the bear trend will continue. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading tight bear channels.