 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of six videos on trading ranges. I'm going to begin by talking about tight trading ranges. Those are trading ranges where the height from the bottom to the top is not very big. It's very difficult to make money entering with stop orders when the range is very tight. In fact, if the range is tight, most traders should not trade. And then I'll move on to talk about limit order markets, which in general are tight trading ranges. And traders who are going to trade them are buying below bars near the bottom using limit orders, wide stops scaling in. And they're using limit orders selling above bars near the top. Sometimes on television, you'll hear traders talk about dead money. And they're usually talking about the daily chart and usually after a big move down like this, a very big bear trend. And then you start to get small sideways bars. The idea is if this is a daily chart, this is several months of trading. You're not going to make money trading here, buying or selling. It's better off looking elsewhere to trade. Whenever the market goes sideways for even two or three bars, usually 10, 20 or 30 bars in a very narrow range from top to bottom. I call it a tight trading range. Most traders should not trade when the market looks like that on any timeframe. Let's say this is a daily or weekly or monthly chart of a stock. It has a big bear trend. And then it starts to get a lot of overlapping bars, very prominent tails, small bodies, lots of dojis. That is a dead money type of chart. I use the term tight trading range. If it goes sideways for 20 or more bars, you should look elsewhere to trade because it's very difficult to make money in this kind of environment. Tight trading ranges are common and they occur on all timeframes and in all markets. When you see them, most traders should look elsewhere to trade. The concept behind dead money. In a stock, for example, it sells off and then it goes sideways. The idea is that it has to go a long time before bulls believe the bear trend has stopped. And after about 20 or 30 bars, the probability of a trend reversal up becomes as high as the probability for trend reversal down. During this process, 20, 30, 40, 50 bars, 100 bars, very little profit potential. No return on investment, so it's dead money. And you should trade elsewhere. In general, whenever you see a trading range, you should look to buy low, sell high, and scalp. If a scalper cannot make money buying low or selling high, using stop orders to enter, then the trading range is tight. If you sell here, you don't make money. If you buy here, not enough room to make money. That is one way to determine if a trading range is tight. If you look at the chart and stop order, traders are not making money, then the range is tight and it's better not to trade the market. Selling here, selling here, selling here, you're not making money. Selling here, not making money. Buying here, buying here, buying here, buying here, not making money. Buying here. Whenever it's difficult to make money, even buying low and selling high, if you're using stop orders, the trading range is tight and therefore you should not trade. Here are examples. Lots of entry setups, but very few profitable trades. A limit order market, not good for stops, therefore a tight trading range. Same thing here. Rather than trading this and not making any money and taking a lot of trades, every little reversal, it's better to wait for a breakout up or down before trading again. Here we got a little breakout and some follow through. This looks like it could be the start of a trend. Traders might start to buy closes here or they might buy this high two buy. Two legs down, one and then a bull bar and then two and then another bull bar or a pullback from this breakout. Some traders will buy the breakout. Consecutive bull bars close above the high of the past 60, 70, 80 bars. It's not yet a big bar closing on its high, but it is an early breakout. If you do take that buy and you are correct that this is the start of a bull trend, it should not come back below the bottom of this breakout. We have a small triangle here, three pushes down, bear, bear, bear bars. Then we have a small bull bar closing on its high. Traders can buy the pullback. It's a bull flag, a breakout here and a pullback from that breakout, another bull bar, buy above the high of that bar. And this is what ultimately followed. You obviously could buy closes on the way up here. Strong breakout, good follow through, high probability that we'll get some kind of measured move up. Trading range has the word range in it and then implies that there's a top and a bottom. And therefore there's a channel, but it's horizontal. Like all channels, they can be very broad or they can be very tight. By broad, I mean a lot of room from top to bottom. Stop entry traders usually can make money buying at the bottom and then selling below bars at the top. When they're tight, very difficult to make money buying above bull bars, even very good looking bull bars like this. Usually better not to trade when they're tight. And they want a big money guess with a small wallet using a trade they can make money on a capture fee. Very broad range. Traders can buy above bull bars at the bottom, sell below bear bars at the top and plenty of room for a scalper swing trade. Also, when it's broad, traders can enter with limit orders betting that breakouts will fail. They'll buy below bad looking sell signals at the bottom of the range. They'll buy below prior lows, so they'll buy at that low. Not a good looking bear flag, a bull body. They'll buy at the low of that bull bar, get filled here. And they'll also buy at this low, betting the breakout will fail. The opposite is true at the top. They expect a top of the range and they'll start selling above bars. They'll sell with the limit order at the high of this bar, get filled here. They'll look at this and say, well, that's a pretty bad looking bull flag. A doji after a big bear reversal bar. They'll sell with the limit order at the high of this bar and get filled here. If it's a broad channel, you can also enter with market orders when there are strong reversals. For example, we have a good bull bar here. Maybe a wedge, one, two, three. Maybe a wedge, one, two, three. And we have a good entry bar. Some traders will buy that close or buy this close. Same thing here. Spike pullback channel, one, two, three. Not a good looking buy signal bar, but a pretty good reversal up. Probably at least a couple of legs up. One pullback, two. And as it's starting to reverse down, traders will get filled here. So traders will buy that close. Opposite is true on the way down. When you see a pretty strong reversal down, and then you see a weak attempt to reverse back up, a lot of traders will sell at the market as this bar is starting to turn down. They might get filled here. They might get filled here. And the same is true here. They see a weak buy signal bar after two legs up, one pullback, two. And as it's starting to reverse down, traders will sell at the market. And if it's a strong leg down, here we have three consecutive bear bars closing below their midpoints. They'll sell the close of the bar, betting that will get down near the bottom of the range. On the other hand, if the range is very tight like this, it's better to not trade and wait for a breakout. There's always a breakout, but you might have to wait a long time. I'm now going to talk about limit order markets, which in general are very tight trading ranges. I don't have a price scale on the side of this, but the market's reversing every two to three bars, very difficult to make money entering with stops, selling below bars at the top, buying above bars at the bottom, taking any trade in the middle third of the range. That is not a good stop order market. And therefore, if you're going to trade, the only way you can make money is entering with limit orders, which basically is the opposite of a stop order. A limit order, for example, you're looking to buy below bars in the lower half. You buy a breakout, betting the breakout will fail. A stop order trader would sell below this bar and get filled here. A limit order trader does the opposite. He places a limit order to buy at that low. Up here, a stop order trader would buy above that high and lose money. A limit order trader would have an order to go short at that high. And as soon as the market went above that high, he would get short and he would make money. Buy zone, the bottom half or the bottom third. Sell zone, the top half or the top third. Bulls and bears, both are scalping. They're expecting the range to continue and not become a trend. They know eventually it will become a trend, but as long as it's sideways, they assume it'll continue sideways. They tend to use wide stops. Many of the experienced traders will do that and they're willing to scale in. For example, place a limit order to buy at the prior low. You get filled here. Place a limit order to buy at that low and you get filled here. Place a limit order to sell at this high. Filled here. Sell this high. Get filled there. Can you simply trade all tight trading ranges with limit orders? No. It's better to have certain minimum requirements. Sometimes, the tight trading range is too tight to make money. Most of the time, traders will only trade if most of the bars are at least the size of a scalp. This is the Imini chart, a 5-minute bar chart. In general, a lot of traders will not trade unless most of the bars are at least 4 ticks tall, which is the size of a minimum scalp. They also want the height of the entire range, from top to bottom, to be at least 3 times bigger than the smallest scalp. The smallest scalp, 1 point. So, they want the height of the range to be at least 3 points tall. And they also want the height of the range to be about 3 times the size of an average bar. Here, an average bar is 4 or 5 ticks tall. So, before they trade, they want the height of the range to be 3 times that. The range here is 27 ticks. This is a tight range. You can see we have 6 sideways bars, 3 here, 3 or 4 here, 3 here. The market is reversing every 2 to 3 bars. However, the height of the range is 7 points tall, 28 ticks. So that's 3 times bigger than the minimum scalp, 4 ticks. And the average bar here is 8 ticks. 28 ticks is more than 3 times that as well. Therefore, even though it's a tight trading range, many experienced traders are willing to trade with scalps using limit orders. Most traders, they should not trade whenever the range is tight. The profit potential is small. It's a lot of work and it's easy to lose money with just a couple mistakes. If it's tight, but big enough for scalps, some traders will trade with limit orders. Again, if it's tight, you should not be entering with stop orders. Because most of the breakouts will not go far enough for a swing trade. Most of the breakouts won't go far enough for a scalp. And you don't want to be buying too high or selling too low when the range is tight. Because you have to bet that each leg up or down is going to reverse within a few bars. Another tight trading range. Lots of reversals. The legs up and down only go a few bars before you get a reversal. Every bear bar followed by a bull bar. Every couple bear bars followed by a bull bar. Bulls and bears both believe that a big move up or down is unlikely. The market is going sideways. Lots of overlapping bars. Prominent tails. Bull bars followed by bear bars. Bear bars followed by bull bars. Here and here. Here and here. A big move up or down is not likely. Bills will buy below bars in the lower half. Betting that bear breakouts will fail. However, because they believe the move won't go up too high, they take quick profits. They scalp. They buy at prior lows. Markets going down. They place a limit order to buy at that low. They get filled here. Markets working lower. They place a buy order to buy at that low. Filled here. And the opposite for the bears. The market is starting to go up. Bears will look to sell above prior highs. Here they get filled. They might have a limit order to sell here as well. A prior high here. They get filled. They might have a limit order to sell here as well. Did not get there. Both will scalp because they do not believe the market will go far enough for a swing trade. And many will scale in and use wide stops. A lot of times they'll enter. Not certain if the market is about to reverse. But they are certain it will not go much lower. So for example, the bull who bought here. If he did not take profits up here, he may buy more here. Betting that the market is not going to fall too far. And it will reverse soon. And he will be able to make a profit. This is the Euro versus the dollar. A five minute chart. How far should your stops be if you are looking for a minimum scalp? When you are trading Forex markets in general, you should always trade for at least a 10 pip profit. If you are trading with limit orders in a limit order market like this, a tight trading range, usually you have to risk 30 pips, sometimes as much as 50 pips. And you usually have to be willing to scale in. Most traders cannot do that. And they are better off not trading when the market looks like this. For example, a bear might sell at this high, get filled here, place a limit order to sell more 10 pips higher, and maybe a stop 30 pips above his first entry. And then when it comes back down to his first entry, he gets out break even on this entry over here. And he gets out with a profit on this entry. He might buy here and he might be willing to buy more 10 pips lower. It did not fall 10 pips lower. So he did not have an opportunity to add to his position. Scale in. And scalpers are going to be taking minimum scalps. The range is tight. It's a 40 pip tall range. Most scalpers will be trading for 10 pip scalps. Lots of opportunities and it looks easy, but in fact it's very difficult to do. Most traders should not be doing this. When you see a tight trading range, you should conclude that neither the bulls nor the bears have a big advantage. The market would not be in a tight trading range if one side or the other had an advantage. It would be trending up or down. When it's in a tight trading range, 50% chance you'll get a bull breakout. 50% chance you'll get a bear breakout. Tight trading range, the bulls see some kind of a bottom, a double bottom, lower, low double bottom. The bears see a double top bear flag. Not quite 20 bars, so not quite equal probability for bulls and bears. The bears still have a slight probability advantage, but not much. If they had a big probability advantage, the market would not be doing this for 10 bars. It would be doing that. Opposite is true here. We have a reversal. Most of the bars are above the moving average. It's a tight trading range. So the probability of a bear breakout is almost as high as for a bull breakout. But because most of the bars are above the moving average and we've had a reversal up, the bulls have a slightly higher probability, but not a big advantage. If they had a big advantage, the market would not be going sideways. We would be going up and up strongly. This is an important thing to notice. A very strong bull trend, a pullback and then a resumption of the bull trend. Here we have what? Eight or nine consecutive bull bars. And then we formed a tight trading range. However, in the tight trading range, there's a small double top and it's slightly lower high than this. This, in fact, is a double top lower high major trend reversal. And like all major trend reversals, there's a 40% chance that the market will have a swing down. Some bears will take that chance and they'll sell below the low of the double top. So they'll sell with a stop below that bar and get filled over here. Some bears prefer to sell below a bear bar. So they might sell with a stop at the low of this bar, one tick below that bar and then get filled over here. It never looks like it could possibly work, but whenever you see a tight trading range and a strong trend, you have to be thinking about the possibility of a double top major trend reversal. If it's a bear trend, you're going to be thinking about a double bottom, higher or low, major trend reversal. Even though the trading range is tight, you can get a huge move. Usually you get two legs down if it is going to go down, and the second is usually bigger than the first. Leg one, pull back, leg two. Higher probability, instead of selling up there, you wait for a strong breakout and good follow-through, and then you sell the close of that bear bar. Higher probability usually means higher risk. If you take that sell, your stop is either here or above the top of the sell climax. Here, you're risking very little. If you sell here, you're risking at least to here, maybe to there. Whenever you have a high probability trade, you have to assume that risk reward is worse, and that usually means the risk is greater, the stop is further away. A double top, a little bit above a double top, but bull trend, tight trading range, and whenever you see a double top and a tight trading range, you have to be thinking about the possibility of a double top, lower high, major trend reversal. Risk is small, and that means probability is small as well. You look at this and you say, oh, I'm going to sell below that bear bar. I'll get filled here. I'm only risking two right here. I'm not risking much, and I have huge profit potential. That is true. Whenever you have a great risk reward set up like this, the probability of making money is small. You're probably going to lose. But mathematically, it's okay. The trader's equation is positive. In general, if it does work, you'll get two legs down, one pull back two, and the second leg is often bigger than the first. Higher probability, you wait for the bear breakout, and you sell either this close, or you sell above the high of this bar, betting that the reversal up will fail. Here we have a low two short, low one, low two, so you can sell below the low of that bar and get filled here. These are higher probability shorts than that original short, but the stop is still up here. Stop is further away. Whenever you have higher probability, you have to assume that risk is greater. Your stop is further away. Usually your reward is less because you're entering after the trend has already gone your way and this left's profit potential left in the trade. In this video, I begin by talking about tight trading ranges and I use my definition of what a tight trading range is to determine whether or not a trader should trade it. In general, traders should not be trading in tight trading ranges. Tight trading ranges are limit order markets. If you cannot make money with stops, the only way you can make money is with limit orders. It looks easy to do, but it's very difficult to do and most traders should not be trading in limit order markets. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks trading course. This is the fourth of six videos on trading ranges. for