 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on trading broad bull channels. Whenever the market pulls back from a new high into the middle third or so of the prior bull leg, that is the buy zone. That's where bulls look to buy. And they want to take profits somewhere above the prior high. 50% pullbacks are common. Very often the market pulls back exactly or almost exactly 50% of the last bull leg and then reverses up. So traders should look to buy around a 50% pullback. Every trading range is a bull flag because it's a broad bull channel. The market is probably going higher. So if the market enters a trading range within the channel, traders should expect trend resumption up. Finally, every channel eventually evolves into a big trading range. This is a broad bull channel lasting several days. A fairly tight bull channel, so a strong bull trend and bulls will look to buy somewhere in the middle third. And that is the buy zone. Lower third, upper third, middle third of the most recent rally. And that is where bulls try to buy. They either buy with limit orders or on a reversal up. Buy a 50% pullback. Place a limit order. Once the market starts to come down, you can figure out where the 50% pullback is. And some bulls place a limit order to buy right there. Their risk is below here. Their reward is here. The risk and reward are the same size. But the market's in a bull trend. So the probability is higher that we'll get here before a stop is hit down here. Other traders prefer to buy a reversal up, which is a better way to enter if you're a beginner. You place a stop to buy above the high of the prior bar, especially if it has a bull body. And especially if it's a two-legged pullback or a wedge pullback to the middle third of the most recent bull leg. Broad channels spend a lot of time sideways. And at times it's unclear whether the channel has evolved into a trading range or if it's simply still a broad bull channel. Sometimes you get pullbacks that fall below what you think is key support. For example, here's a 50% pullback. The market has a couple of legs up and it failed at the high. Is this a lower high major trend reversal in the start of a bear trend? Or is it the start of a bear leg in a trading range? You don't know. Some bulls will rely on a stop below the bottom of the bull trend and they'll buy. They'll buy with the limit order at the prior low, betting the bear breakout will fail. Or they'll buy on a reversal up, again relying on their stop down here. Here's a bull leg. This is the bottom third of that bull leg. And if the market is much more like a trading range than a bull trend as it is in this rectangle, rather than buying in the middle third of the most recent leg up, a lot of traders will trade it more like a trading range and buy in the bottom third. When it's clearly in a bull trend, traders buy in the middle third, around a 50% pullback. When it's not so clear that it's still in a bull trend and it looks more like a trading range, traders prefer to buy in the bottom third, here or on a reversal up. You can buy with a limit order somewhere around 60 or 70% down. Some traders like to use Fibonacci numbers, but I think it's nonsense. Better to buy with a stop on a reversal up, especially if you're starting out. Higher probability of making money. It's a bull trend. Clearly making higher highs and higher lows. And therefore you can buy at any time as long as you use an appropriate stop. Below the bottom of the most recent major high or low. Strong leg up, major low. Traders can buy at any time and put a stop there. Another strong reversal up to a new high. This then is a major higher low. Traders can buy at any time and put a stop there. You can even buy at a prior high. For example, with the stop order one tick above this high or one tick above that high. As long as you use the appropriate stop. Even buying at the high is profitable if you use the appropriate stop. And especially if you can scale in lower. Because a Broad Bull channel behaves so much like a trading range. It's usually better not to be buying high. You want to be buying low. And you want to be selling high selling to take profits. The stop is obvious. A very strong blue range. The stop is obvious. A very strong blue range. If you want to buy low. The stop is obvious. There's a strong blue line. The stop is obvious. The stop is obvious. The stop is obvious, a very strong bull leg up, a major higher low. This is a good location for a stop. Here we have a spike pullback channel. Some bulls will put their stop here. It's probably better here. And we have a breakout to a new high, a fairly tight channel. This is a major higher low in an ongoing bull trend. So a reasonable location for a stop. Strong breakout to a new high, major higher low. Because so much of the time it looks like it's in a trading range, and it is in a trading range, rather than buying a breakout to a new high, as you would do in a strong bull trend, in a broad bull channel, it's better to be buying pullbacks. Rather than buying at the new high, it's better to be buying pullbacks from the new high. Because bears will be selling at the new high, knowing that the reversal is down, will be deep enough for them to make a profit. And then, you should take profits at prior highs. That means you should sell at prior highs, or at least take partial profits. Profit taking zone at or above the most recent high. If the bulls bought this pullback, they're going to try to get out at or around that high. If they bought a pullback here, here's the most recent major lower high. They'll try to get out here. Here's the most recent high. They'll try to get out there. So every prior high is a profit taking area for bulls who buy the pullbacks. Again, you can buy for any reason, but it's good to be buying in the middle third of the prior bull leg, and then taking partial or full profits at or above the prior high. Or you could take profits on a reversal down. Some traders do not want to put a limit order to take profits at the prior high, just in case the market keeps going up. Instead, they'll look to take profits on a reversal down from around the prior high. Here slightly below that high, and we're starting to reverse down. Remember, the bears are going to be doing the same thing. They're going to be selling exactly where the bulls are selling. The bulls are selling to take profits. The bears are selling to make a profit. They're betting that the pullbacks will be deep enough for them to make a scalp. And sometimes the market will become always in short, and they can make more than a scalp. They can have a swing down. The broad bull channel is simply a trading range that's sloped upward, and it behaves like a trading range. And therefore, bulls have to expect deep pullbacks. And you need to stop below the most recent major high or low. Again, this maybe is major. We came up to a new high. A few legs up. One pullback, two pullback, three. But it's a spike in channel. Spike pullback channel. And the market often falls a little bit below the bottom of the channel before reversing up. And therefore, a better location if you're looking for a swing is here. A bull who did not get up on the reversal down here, it's better to have their stop down here rather than here. A lot of bulls like to buy around the most recent high or low, major or minor, or they'll buy on a reversal up. This is a type of double bottom. Some computers will see this as a double bottom. Strong rally, pullback, and we pull back again, but to a higher low. And therefore, this is a double bottom. Some computers will even see this as a double bottom. A slightly higher low for the second bottom, but it's still a double bottom after the pullback from this breakout. So this is a double bottom bull flag. This is a double bottom bull flag. In both cases, you're going to look to buy the reversal up. Double bottoms are rarely ever perfect. Double tops are rarely ever perfect also. Double tops are rarely ever perfect. Remember, the odds are, if you think it's a bull channel, every one of these reversal attempts will fail. And some bulls, therefore, will buy the closes of big bear bars, betting that the follow through will be disappointing. They basically are treating it like a second leg trap. Leg one, pullback leg two. They're betting that the bear breakout simply will trap weak bears into selling low. Remember, bulls are trying to buy pullbacks. They want to buy below the high because they know there'll be a lot of sellers at the high. Other bulls will sell to take profits and bears will sell to go short. And therefore, if everyone's looking to buy low, there's sometimes a lack of buyers near the top. The result can be a sell vacuum. The bulls do not want to buy too high. So when the market starts to go down, it often can go very fast. And then suddenly the bulls appear. Here we get a gap down and the bulls did not want to buy here. However, they were very happy to buy this low. And that's what I'm talking about, about a second leg trap. In the top third, top half, a lot of times the market will fall quickly because the buyers do not want to buy too high. And then when it falls low enough, all of a sudden the bulls buy aggressively, overwhelm the bears. There are often many choices for a stop. If the choices are reasonable, using any of them is fine. If you use a tighter stop, it's going to get hit more often, but you'll lose less. If you use a wider stop, it will get hit less often and you lose more when it gets hit. However, if you take 10 trades with the tight stop, 10 trades with the wide stop, you'll end up making about the same amount of money. So it's a matter of personal preference. The key is the stops have to be reasonable. If you use a stop that is too tight or too wide, you're going to lose money. A major higher low. So we have a strong bull breakout, a reversal up. This is a major higher low. That is a reasonable location for a stop just below that low. We have a new low reversing up slightly higher low after a strong sell up from a new high. As I said, some traders would look at this as major. Others would say this is really major and this is minor. It's an important minor, but it's probably not really a major higher low. Is it reasonable for the stop here? It probably is. But in general, if you're not getting out on the reversal down, it's probably better to put the stop down here, which is clearly a major higher low. If a trader did buy for any reason and put a stop down here, he'd get it stopped out. But we're still forming a higher low on this reversal up. He can always buy again on the reversal up after a stop was hit. 50% pullback. Very important location for any trade. We're getting very deep pullback, but higher lows and higher highs. So we're in a bull trend, even though it's weak. The bears are in control for a lot of bars. Here, 50, 60, 70 bars. The bears are in control. Here, 30 bars. The bears are in control. But we're still forming higher lows and higher highs. So it's still a bull trend. Because it's a bull trend, by definition, it's probably going to form a new high before it forms a new major low. At a 50% pullback, for the bulls, the reward equals the risk. Strong bull leg. Here's the 50% pullback. If a trader at this instant were to buy, he's looking for a test of the high, and his stop is below the low. His reward is equal to the risk. But we're in a bull trend. Therefore, it's more likely he's going to make a profit than it is he's going to lose money. And therefore, bulls will buy with a limit order at a 50% pullback. Stop just below the bottom of the major low. Here, the bulls have two legs up, maybe a trading range. It did not reach his target. However, it's starting to reverse down. A lot of bulls will exit, maybe below this bear bar. They would exit because if the market's turning into a trading range, and they bought fairly low, they want to sell high. And they'll convert to scalping more and swing trading less. The bears see it as a double top or a slightly lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout, lower high. And they might get a reversal down. A low, a rally. Remember, this is a 50% pullback. Traders bought it here. And they might either buy it here or on a reversal up from a pullback below the 50% line. They can either take profits with a limit order at the prior high or on a reversal down. Here's a bear bar at the end of the session. They could sell out of their lungs below that bear bar. Reasonably strong leg up. A lot of traders will place a limit order to buy at a 50% pullback. This green box stopped down here. Profit target up here. Others will buy on a reversal up. Slightly higher probability because the market's reversing up from the support of a 50% pullback. Again, they can exit with a limit order selling out of their lungs at the prior high or on a reversal down below that little reversal bar. That's a second entry sell. We tried to reverse down below the spare bar. And then just two bars later, we're trying to reverse down again. And it's either in a broad bull channel or possibly in a trading range. In both cases, it's reasonable to get out of longs on a second reversal down because bears will sell knowing that the probability is higher of making money after a second reversal down in a broad bull channel or in a trading range. Couple weeks of a channel fairly broad. Looks tight, but in fact, on the five minute chart, it's broad. The market was always in short and was in a bear trend day this day. But that bear trend is simply a higher low in a bull channel. 20 day bull channel. 20 day bull channel. It's a very tight channel on the 60 minute chart. The pullbacks are 20 or 30 points. That's tight on a 60 minute chart. But if you're trading it on the five minute chart, those pullbacks are big and the channel is broad. Every broad bull channel has trading ranges within them. And you can see the trading ranges are forming higher and higher up. So they're trending trading ranges. The odds of trend resumption up are better than the odds of trend reversal down when you're in a bull trend. Trading range breakout mode. Typically 50% chance you'll get a reversal down. 50% chance you get a reversal up. 50% chance the first breakout up or down will fail and reverse. However, the trend up is very strong. The odds always slightly favor the trend continuing. So trend resumption up is always slightly more likely than trend reversal down. If you get enough bars in the range, the probability starts to become close to 50-50. Every trading range has both a reasonable buy setup and a reasonable sell setup. The buy setup is usually a double bottom bull flag. And the sell setup is usually some kind of a double top. Remember, every major trend reversal is a type of double top. Sometimes you get a lower high. Other times you get a higher high. Here we have an expanding triangle. Yet the trend continued up. In fact, it accelerated up. Higher high major trend reversal, which is a double top. Type of double top where the second high is higher. Trend continuing up. Here a double top. Neckline broke below the neckline, but reversed back up. A final flag. A bull breakout that's reversing down. Head and shoulders top. Started to break to the downside, but failed and continued back up. Expanding triangle. Tried to reverse down. The bulls bought it. And the bull trend continued. Another final flag. Reversal similar to this. A tight trading range. A breakout. A reversal down. Many of the patterns have two or more ways to label them. It doesn't matter. Don't lose sight of the goal. The bears are looking for a top. You want to call the top the goal. Let's see. Take a look at the top. flag reversal similar to this. A tight training range, a breakout, a reversal down. Many of the patterns have two or more ways to label them. It doesn't matter. Don't lose sight of the goal. The Bears are looking for a top. You want to call this a final flag top. You want to call it a head and shoulders top. Doesn't matter. Expanding triangle top. Every expanding triangle top is also a higher high major trend reversal. It doesn't matter. The Bears are simply looking for a reasonable sell setup. And all of these are reasonable, which means a trader can sell. Most of these shorts either turn into small profits or small losses. Whenever a top fails, the Bears are going to give up and they're going to buy back their shorts for a loss. And the Bulls will buy as well. The Bears who sell for any reason, they're giving up. The Bears who sell, they ultimately give up. The Bears who sold this top, if they're still holding short, they give up. The Bears who sold this top, it breaks above their stop, they give up. The Bulls know the Bears are going to give up. And therefore, the Bulls will buy, looking for some kind of a measured move up based upon the height of the top. Every trading range is a Bull flag when you're in a broad Bull channel. If enough bars form, then the probability gets close to 50-50. But in general, you have to assume that if the market's in a broad Bull channel, every one of those trading ranges is more likely to continue up than to reverse down. Here we have six trading ranges. Different ways to draw them, but I chose to draw them this way. Every one of the trading ranges is either a Bull flag or it contains a Bull flag. And a Bear break out below the Bull flag is probably going to reverse and the Bull trend will probably continue because trends have inertia, which means they tend to resist change. And that means that they tend to continue up. A breakout above a Bear channel and we have a double bottom, double bottom Bull flag within the trading range. If you want, you can call this a triangle and the Bull's got a breakout. A Wedge Bull flag. We tried to reverse up, tried to reverse up again here, trying to reverse up again a third time, and that makes it a Wedge Bull flag. Double bottom. Another Wedge Bear channel. Every Wedge Bear channel is a Bull flag when you're in a Bull trend. Failed breakout below the bottom of the trading range. Maybe we don't know yet. We don't know what the bars to the right look like. Failed breakout. Again, because the market's clearly in a trend, even though it's in breakout mode, the odds are always going to slightly favor the Bulls, sometimes greatly favor the Bulls if the trading range is brief. As long as it continues to make higher lows and higher highs, it's still in a Bull trend. Easier for the Bulls to make money than it is for the Bears to make money. And that's because it's in a Bull trend. It's more likely to go up than down. And Bears making money are only making a little bit of money. Some of the Bulls who are buying, they're buying down here and they're riding it all the way up. And they have a huge swing profit. The best the Bears can get is an occasional brief swing down. A day trader is going to trade each one of these days individually. Here we have a Bear trend day in a bigger Bull trend, but it's still a Bear trend day. And you have to bet it's going to be a Bull flag. But if you're a day trader, you're going to be selling because the five minute chart during this day is in a Bear trend. This is a broad Bull channel. And here we have a Bull breakout above the Bull channel. However, 75% of the time, if you get a breakout above a Bull channel, it's going to fail. This is the 25% of the time when it does not. You have a strong breakout above a Broad Bull channel. You have a pullback and then you have another channel. And then eventually it falls into a trading range. The market cycle starts over with a strong breakout. So breakout, pullback, channel, and then trading range. The market was trying to reverse repeatedly. And here we broke out strongly. And the character of the market changed from a Bull channel, which should have evolved into a trading range, to a new Bull breakout. And therefore, the market's probably going to get some kind of a measured move up. And it's a breakout again. Normally, a Bull channel evolves into a trading range. 25% of the time, you get a breakout. And you trade it as you would any other breakout. The market cycle is starting over. Every channel eventually evolves into a trading range. Sometimes a very big range, but still a trading range. This is a 120-minute E-mini chart, Globex market. We have a channel here. We have a bigger channel here. Nothing lasts forever. Eventually, everything evolves into something else. Channels usually evolve into trading ranges, which means Bull channels, 75% of the time, have a bear breakout and then a bear swing. And the entire chart ends up as a big trading range. Only 25% chance you're going to get a successful Bull breakout above a Bull channel and then start the market cycle over again. 75% chance a Bull breakout above a bull channel is going to fail. And eventually the market will have a bear channel and usually forms a large trading range. Once the market starts falling below major higher lows, like here, then it's no longer a bull trend. It's either a bear trend or a big trading range. As long as it keeps making major higher lows, it's either a bull trend or a trading range. I began by talking about the buy zone. When the market's in a bull trend, you try to buy a pullback to the middle third of the prior rally, prior leg up. Bulls tend to take profits above the top of the bull trend, above the top of the bull trend, and bears will scalp up there. 50% pullbacks are important because if the market retraces 50% of the prior bull leg, a trader buying at that instant has a higher probability of a new high than he does of the market falling below the bottom of the bull leg. Risk and reward are equal, but probability favors the bulls. And therefore buying a 50% pullback in a bull trend has good math. Every trading range in a broad bull trend is a bull flag. The odds are the market will continue higher because the market is in a bull trend and those trading ranges are just part of the bull trend. Eventually, every channel evolves into a trading range. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on trading broad bull channels. Okay. attacks