 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Horse. This is the fourth of five videos on Forex Basics. The first important point I make is that charts are not exactly what they appear to be, and you should assume that they are good approximations of what's actually taking place, but they are not exact. Finally, I'm going to be talking about scalping and swing trades. When I say that Forex charts are only approximate, one of the things that I mean is that if you have a chart on your computer and you're using one broker and somebody else has a chart on his computer using another broker, the prices are not necessarily the same. Different brokers use different banks. Some brokers use many banks. Even though arbitrage traders keep the prices relatively tight so that the difference never gets very far from one bank to another, the charts are slightly different for each broker and each bank because the charts only show the trades from your particular broker. For example, this top chart is from Interactive Brokers IB and you can see the red five here. That is the current last trade on this five minute bar. And this is the identical time but a chart from the FXCM broker and you can see the last trade was one pip lower. There are actually several ways to construct a chart. There are actually several ways to construct a chart. Given that there is no last trade, brokers have to use something else to construct charts. They can have the chart constructed entirely on bid prices. They can have it constructed entirely upon ask prices. They can have a combination of bid and ask and they can also use the midpoint of the bid and ask. Brokers have several options on how to construct charts. The most common charts are either based upon the inside bid, which is more common, and then the inside asking price. For example, here are two charts. The prices are actually slightly different. The bottom of this black rectangle on this bar is the final most recent trade. Right below it, one pip below, there are orders wanting to buy there. And a pip below that, there are other orders bidding there. A pip below that, other orders bidding there. A pip above that most recent price, there are traders asking to sell there. And then higher, other asks, other asks, other asks. The lowest ask above the current price is the inside ask. And the highest bid, right below the most recent price, is the inside bid. This chart is based upon inside bids. And this chart is based upon inside asks. So in this particular chart, the high is 19 pips. 1.1319. This is the euro versus the dollar. And this chart is based upon the inside bid, which is the default for FXCM. And then on this lower chart, the chart's based upon the inside ask. And the high is 1.5 pips higher. The ask is always higher than the bid. Some brokers on their symbol will put a point A next to the symbol. Trade station used to do that to show that it's an ask chart rather than a bid chart. Interactive brokers, they base their charts on either the midpoint of the bid and ask. Here's an example of a chart based upon the midpoint of the bid and ask. That's their default chart. They carried out to six decimal places. Four is the pip. And then they have two more decimal places beyond that. Most traders cannot trade those last two decimal places because the price moves too fast. The low of that bar right here is six decimal places as well. And then they also create charts based upon the minimum bid and the maximum ask. The bar is bigger because it's not using a midpoint. It's using the bid and ask. And the high of this chart is here at 16.5 pips and here is 14.5 pips. The low of this bar is 1.1312.5. The low of this bar is 1.131375. The charts are not going to be exact even with one broker because some traders will be looking at the charts constructed this way. Other traders will be looking at charts constructed another way. Now there's something that's interesting about Forex charts that is different from other types of charts, stock market charts and futures charts. Now I said that the default for FXCM charts is that they only show bids, not actual trades and not the ask. And because of that, buys which always get filled at the ask can be above the high of the bar. So you can get filled on a long above the high of the bar. If you're trying to buy, you're going to get filled at the ask. And the ask is always above the bid. And the high of this bar is based upon the bid because every price on the chart is based upon the bid. You might get filled on a buy order above the high of the bar and your trade might not even be on the chart. Remember, everything in this chart is based upon the bid. But when you buy, you get filled on the ask, which is always higher. You can get filled right here above the high of that bar and your trade might not even be on the chart. Likewise, if you place a limit order to buy here, you might not get filled here. Buy orders are filled at the ask, which is above the bid and therefore above the low of the bar. You only get filled if the ask falls below the buy order. Here you place an order to buy. The market drops below your order, but you don't necessarily get filled. Remember, these are only bids. The entire chart is only bids. So, yes, the low of this bar is the lowest inside bid during that five minute period. That does not mean that a trade actually took place there. You can place a limit order to buy here. You can see the bar dip below your price and you do not get filled. If it was a stock chart, you would get filled. But because this chart is based only on bids, you're not necessarily going to get filled. And you have the opposite problem if you choose instead to have your charts based upon the ask. Your sell trade may not be on the chart. So, FXCM allows you to create charts showing only asks. So, for example, here's a chart and every price on this chart is ask only, not bid. And if you're selling, you get filled with the bid, not the ask. You can get filled below the low of a bar. So, for example, you could get filled selling below the low of this bar and the bar never gets down to your price, even though the trade took place. This chart does not show trades. It only shows asks. And likewise, right here, let's say you place a limit order to sell and the bar goes a little bit above your limit order. If that was a stock chart or a futures chart, you'd get filled. Your short order would be filled. However, sell orders are filled at the bid, which is below the ask and therefore below the high of the bar. And you only get filled if the bid goes above the sell order. That's just something you have to deal with when you're trading with Forex markets, especially if you're a scalper where every little pip matters. You should just assume that the charts are approximate and never perfect. Don't worry if it looks like your order should be filled and it's not filled. If you're worried and you really think you should have been filled, you can call your broker. But chances are your broker will do nothing. And they'll say if you read the fine print when you signed up for your account, they are on a not held basis. Anything that goes wrong, it's your problem. I want to talk a little bit about scalping and swing trading. There's no clear definition of a scalp versus a swing trade. And in general, if a trade lasts one to five bars and there are no pullbacks or you allow only a minimum pullback, it's a scalp. And a lot of Forex traders don't even use the term scalp. Everything is a trade. So it does not matter if you get out with a five pip profit or an 11 pip loss. A lot of Forex traders just say it's a trade. They don't say it's a scalp. In general, when traders do use the term scalp, they're talking about trading smaller timeframe charts, not hourly charts. Usually they're trying to make 10 to 50 pips profit and any trade more than that, they'll call just a trade. For example, let's say you buy this one. You buy this bull bar. You buy right above this bull bar betting on a failed bear breakout, but you're expecting the market to continue mostly sideways. So you're not looking for a big trade. You're looking for a quick profit. And let's say you exit right here with a 10 pips profit. One bar later, 15 minutes later, 10 minutes later, that is a scalp. A swing trader buying this trade would not get out here. He would hold, but then at some point he's seeing that the trade is not going very far. And now we're getting near the end of the session, 11 o'clock, 12 o'clock California time, and he might get out here. Even though he only made 18 pips profit instead of 50 pips or 100 pips, and the market did not go up much at all from the scalp exit, this person is still possibly a swing trader because he took the trade with the intention of holding it for a swing. Now let's say we have this. We have a double bottom after a bull breakout. So maybe it's a double bottom bull flag. It certainly is, but maybe it's also a double bottom high or low major trend reversal. We don't know what came before. But in any case, we have a strong reversal up. Four consecutive bull bars and then a tight trading range. They might buy above this bull bar, especially since there was a bull bar here. So they're buying a double bottom bull flag. The scalper might get out here, might get out on this reversal down, a failed breakout above this high. So he might get out with 10 or 20 pips. The swing trader will hold as long as he believes his premise is still valid. And here, the end of the Asia session, he might get out below one or two of these bear bars. We have a bear II, you know, three or four pushes up, one, two, three, and then larger, one, two, three. Larger, one, two, three. Larger, one or one, two, three. A nested wedge and end of the session. The bars are getting small, becoming dojis. And then we have a bear II. So the swing trader would get out here and he made 26 pips profit, more than a 10 pips scalp. And it's not quite 50 pips or a hundred pips, but he held the trade for more than four or five bars. And he was willing to hold through repeated reversal attempts. And he held until he felt that his premise was no longer valid or that the session was going to end. Those are characteristics of swing trading. This is a 60 minute chart. And on a five or 15 minute chart, a scalp generally is about 10 pips, 20 pips, maybe sometimes 40 pips. But on a 60 minute chart, you can also take a brief trade, hold it for one, two, three, four, five bars. And you can call it a scalp. If you do call it a scalp on the 60 minute chart, you're probably trading for 20 to 50 pips. So let's say here we have a triangle or a tight trading range. And then we have a breakout and a follow through bar. A decent breakout bar close below the low of the past 30 bars, maybe. And then another bar closing on a slow. At this point, the probability of some kind of a move down, probably a measured move down at a minimum, measured move based upon the height of that range. Traders will conclude the market is always in short, but it's probably going lower. So let's say you sold the close of this follow through bar. And then you see this sell climax bar and you wonder, well, maybe that's the end of it. And you took your profit. Maybe you placed a limit order to scalp out with 20 pips, arguing that we're not getting consecutive big bear bars. This is a pair of bear bars, but they're not particularly big. So maybe this is bear leg in a trading range. Maybe a bear leg in a bear channel that will soon reverse up. So you're just not confident that it's going to go far. Maybe you place a limit order to get out 20 pips lower and you get filled here. You're trading the 60 minute chart right here. And you get out with 20 pips. You get out two bars after you entered, not many bars. You did not allow any pullbacks. And you did not hold until there was a clear reason to believe that your premise was wrong. All right. Those are characteristics of a scalp. On the other hand, let's say you held, held, held, held, held. And then we started to enter a tight trading range here. And you're wondering, you know, maybe it's the end of the Asian session. Maybe we'll reverse up. Who knows? But the market is losing momentum the end of the Asian session. So maybe you get out above this bar. We have a high two buy. There's a high one. Here's a high two. If you did that, you would be getting out with 49 pips. And I would call that a swing trade. First of all, because you're around 50 pips. Second, you held for a lot of bars. Third, you held through a reversal attempt. And fourth, you held as long as the premise remained valid. And you only exited when you thought the premise may no longer be valid. In this video, I made the point that charts are only approximate. Forex charts are only approximate. Very different from stock market charts and futures charts. And I also talked about the difference between a swing trade and a scalp. A scalp in general, you're going to exit in one to five bars. If you allow a pullback, you only allow a small brief pullback. In a swing trade, you are willing to hold onto the trade for as long as you can. In a swing trade, you'll hold onto the trade for as long as your premise remains valid. That could be one bar. It could be 30, 40 bars. And you'll hold through many reversal attempts as long as none is strong enough to change your premise. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on Forex Basics. in Russia. Eight. Seven.