 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading major trend reversal bottoms. I want to begin by talking a little bit about the setup and how to trade them. And then I want to talk about the importance of anticipating the setup. When traders are looking for a lower low major trend reversal, they need some evidence that the bulls are strong. Once traders decide that the market's in a bear trend, they assume that every reversal attempt will be minor and lead to either a bear flag and a resumption of the bear trend or a trading range, not a major reversal into a bull trend. However, at some point, if a minor reversal has pretty good buying pressure, a series of bull bars lasting 10 bars, getting gap bars. Here we have a gap below the low of this bar and the moving average, and most importantly, breaking above the bull channel. Traders wonder if the next attempt at a reversal will be major instead of minor. So instead of leading to another bear flag, maybe it will lead to a bull trend. Traders, after this much buying pressure, will trade the next reversal up for a swing trade. After three big bear bars like this and a weak buy signal bar, a lot of traders will wait for a second entry buy. We have one here, but again, it's a bear bar. Other traders prefer to buy above a bull bar. So they'll place a buy stop to get long above the high of this bar and put a stop down here. This is a small double bottom and a lower low major trend reversal. This is a small double bottom higher low after the reversal up. But this is a lower low major trend reversal. We're below the bear trend low. We have a strong enough minor reversal to make traders think the next reversal possibly could be major. And by major, traders are looking for at least a couple legs up, a swing up, a reward at least twice as big as the risk, and usually 20 or more bars. Here, the bulls who took any of these buys ended up with a reward many times greater than their risk. A rally breaking above the bear trend line, breaking above the top of the bear channel. A very strong minor reversal, and therefore, traders wonder if the next reversal will be even stronger and become a major reversal into a bull trend. We have a wedge bear flag, which is a reasonable candidate for a final bear flag before a reversal. Moving average gap bars usually leads to the final leg of a bear trend before the bulls get an attempt at a major trend reversal. The minor reversal has to be at least five bars, preferably 10 or more. It should break above the top of the bear channel and above the moving average. Sometimes it can be a single bull bar if it's extremely big. But in general, traders need five to 10 bars with pretty good bull bars in that minor reversal for traders to begin to look for a major reversal. You have a reversal strong enough to break above the trend line, and then you get a resumption of the bear trend. Testing the old low. Sometimes it turns up a little bit above, sometimes it goes a little bit below. But you want the bear trend to resume. Here we have a very strong resumption of the bear trend, but it turns out, in hindsight at least, it was a climactic end of the bear trend. Usually, the resumption of the bear trend will be weak. Lots of overlap, lots of small reversals on the way down. When the sell-off is strong like this, usually the bulls will need a second entry buy. Normally, the first reversal up is minor, and they need a second entry, which would be buying here. While you could buy here for the lower low major trend reversal, this low is below that, so it's a lower low. When the sell-off is this strong, normally, the first reversal up will not get far, and you'll have to come down and test this low close. The bears are selling closes, and they're disappointed by this rally. They'll sell more as the rally continues, expecting the market to get down to this close, which it did. Higher probability to buy on the reversal up here, the second reversal up. Or you could start buying closes as the market goes up. Finally, after you have the break-up of the trend line and the resumption of the bear trend, you want a good buy signal bar as the market's starting to get another pullback. However, this pullback, you think, has a chance to not be a pullback, but an actual trend reversal. In general, when you have a major trend reversal setup, you have about a 40% chance of a swing. It's a higher probability reversal if you have a strong buy signal bar. This is not a very good buy signal bar. This is a reversal bar, but it has a bare body, so that is not strong either. If you prefer it, you can buy above a bull bar, like above this bar, or above this bar as well. Sell time acts, weak buy signal bars. In general, the market might be transitioning into a trading range, and if you have a low in a trading range and you have a second entry buy, even with a weak buy signal bar, it's usually a profitable trade. In this box, we also have five consecutive bull bars. Four of them have closes above the midpoint, so that's a sign of bulls buying at the new low, or on the reversal up from the prior low. When you buy the reversal, you're buying in a bear trend. The market usually is still always in short, and it often is always in short for five or more bars after the market begins to reverse. And that is why I say the probability is only about 40% that you're going to get a swing profit. The bears are still strong, and at this point, it's still slightly more likely the bear trend will continue than it is that the bull trend will reverse. And that's why I say the market's still always in short. Once traders believe it's clearly always in long, maybe by the third consecutive bull bar, the fourth consecutive bull bar closing on its high, then the probability of making a profit goes up to 60% or more. It could get that way with a single very big bull bar, but it's much more common to get a series of three or four ordinary bull bars. Traders can take profits all at once, or they can scale out in two or more steps. Remember, you're taking a trade that only has a 40% chance of a swing profit. To compensate for that low probability, you need good risk reward. At a minimum, you should be exiting with a profit that is at least twice your actual risk. If your actual risk is very small, then you should exit with a profit that's at least twice your initial risk. If the initial risk is also small, then look for some other rational reason to take profits. If you bought above this bar, you get filled right here. Your initial risk might be to below the low of this bar. Your actual risk, you know it after the market starts to go up, was to just below the low of this bar. This is really the initial risk to below the low of that bar. This is one times the initial risk, and that is two times the initial risk. And you can see when the market got there, it pulled back. And that tells you that traders sold. They sold either because they're taking profits based upon two times the initial risk, or they sold because it's testing a prior high. And you also had bear selling as well, at least for a scalp. However, the channel up is fairly tight. The odds are the first pullback will be minor and the bull trend will resume. And therefore, it's a low probability short. When you're near the close of the session and you're still long, you have to look for reasons to take profits. For example, we have a bear reversal bar here. Exiting below its low is okay. It's not a strong sell signal. And it's following four decent bull bars. It's okay to hold to see if you get a strong bear reversal and then exit lower. If you do not exit here, then you exit a few seconds before the close of the session, or maybe a minute or two before the close of the session. Whenever I see a bear channel, I look at it and I see a bull flag. 75% chance it's eventually going to get a bull breakout. And then I expect a transition into a big trading range. Therefore, the major reversal that you have here probably will result in the formation of a large trading range. However, the move up can be enough for a swing trade. When the market's rallying, it's retracing the lower highs. For the bears, they believe it's still a bear trend as long as it keeps making major lower highs. Here's a lower high that is a strong sell-off to a new low. This is major. If the market gets above that high, the bears believe that it's no longer in a bear trend. It's then either in a trading range or in a bull trend. For the bulls, these lower highs are all targets all the way up to the top of the channel. Whenever you're looking for any kind of a trade, it's always good to anticipate. Look at what the market is trying to do. And if you can see a pattern setting up, then you're ready to take the trade. The market sold off, rallied, sold off, rallied, and selling off again for the third time. Even though it does not have a wedge shape, the buying has been pretty good in the prior rallies. And when you have a third push down, it often functions like a wedge bottom and you can get a swing up. This third push down did not quite reach the line, but that does not matter. A lot of times you get an undershoot like that. When you see the third push down forming, you have to be ready for the possibility of a reversal. Basically a wedge bottom, and that means a couple legs sideways to up, at least 10 bars sideways to up. You only want to be buying a wedge reversal, a wedge bottom, if the channel is fairly broad. Meaning if the legs up in the channel are fairly strong. That increases the chances that you'll get a reversal up after the third push down. Traders will buy the reversal up. A new low, some traders will buy the reversal up. A new low, they'll buy the reversal up. Again, when it's very steeply down as it is here with those three bare bars, a lot of traders will wait for a second entry buy, like above this bar or above a bull bar, and get long here. That has a higher probability of leading to a profitable trade. If a wedge channel is very tight, it's usually not worth buying. If you're in a wedge bare channel. For example here, this is a very tight channel. You can call it a wedge bottom, one, two, three. Chances are you're not going to get much of a rally. The reversal up will be minor, and the bare trend will try to resume. This is a lower probability buy. Certainly for a swing, it's a very low probability buy. However, now, in addition to a wedge, one, two, three, we have a potential lower low major trend reversal. This has a higher chance of leading to a swing up. When I say you want a relatively broad channel, here, we have about 10 bars up in each of the two attempts to rally. If the rallies are small, like two, three, four, five bars, they are minor, and any reversal will probably lead to either a bear flag and a resumption of the bear trend or a trading range. When you have a potential wedge bottom or a potential major trend reversal bottom, the final leg is often a weak sell-off. It often contains several bull bars and steer steps down. Alternatively, the bear bars will often have big tails below, and every bear bar will be followed by a bull bar. That is not the case here. Here, we have the strongest series of three bear bars in the entire bear trend. The bear trend lasted about 50 bars. Whenever you have the strongest bear breakout occurring 20 or more bars into a bear trend, it's more likely to be an exhaustive end of the trend instead of an acceleration of the trend. It's therefore more likely to be an exhaustion gap than a measuring gap. At this point, there's a gap between this close and that low, so it's more likely to get up to that low and to the top of the cell climax than it is to fall for a measured move down. Again, as I said, when the sell-off to the new low is extremely strong like this, it's better to wait for a second entry buy. You have a higher probability of making a profit. Again, a bear trend. We have a rally to the moving average, and we have a sell-off to a higher low. Is this a higher low major trend reversal? Is it major or is it minor? The rally lasted only four bars, and we could not get a single close above the moving average. The sell-off lasted about seven or eight bars, which is good, the resumption of the bear trend, and we have a higher low. However, this is a problem. We have a very tight bear channel, and all we have is a four-bar rally that touches the moving average. This is a 20-gap bar sell signal. The market has not been back to the moving average in about 20 bars. The bears are going to be very eager to sell. They got to the moving average, and they sold again here. They sold here. They sold here. They sold here. They sold here. This is not enough buying pressure after this tight a bear channel lasting this many bars to create a major reversal, and therefore this high or low is probably a minor reversal, which means it will result either in a trading range or a bear flag and not a bull trend. Look at the bear bars. Series of 5, 6, 7 bear bars, 10 bear bars. The biggest pullback lasted only one bar here, one bar here, one bar here. This is not the kind of trend that is about to turn into a bull trend. And therefore, any reversal that we get, even though you could argue it might be a major trend reversal, it's probably going to be a minor reversal. The bulls need much more buying than just four bars up to the moving average. If anything, it's better to look to sell. We have a low 2 short, low 1, another test of the moving average, low 2 with a bear bar closing below its midpoint. You have a higher probability of making money selling below this bear bar than you do buying above this bull bar. In this video, I talked about trading major trend reversal bottoms. And I talked about the importance of trying to anticipate the bottom. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading major trend reversal bottoms. So, it seems to me to premiere. See how some big numbers are in one bar. I think, this is what I wanted to do here. So, why should I get that? Let me turn to some bottle Titans. When we'reEtened for the bombs TO impress, I'm one bar here. I'll give you a little more measure of Cabinet lending making money at the tablespoon. Thank you.