 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of six videos on channels. I'll begin by talking about how channels evolve into trading ranges. I'll move on to talking about how most channel breakouts up or down fail. And finally, I'll talk about a with trend breakout of a channel. So if you have a bull channel, sometimes you get a bull breakout. If you have a bear channel, sometimes you get a bear breakout. As the channel progresses, bulls become less confident that the trend will continue, and they begin to take quicker profits. They begin to scalp. Also, bears begin to see that if they sell at the high of the prior bar and add on higher, they can begin to make profits. Bulls selling at new highs. Instead of buying new highs, confident that the trend will go up much further, they begin to take profits at new highs. So they buy a pullback, and they begin to take profits at the prior high. They are beginning to think that the trend might not continue all that much further. And maybe this channel is the beginning of an evolution from a strong bull trend, a breakout, to a channel, and then to a trading range. This is a spike in channel. Spike, pullback, second push, pullback, third push. Most spike in channel patterns like this have three pushes, one, two, three, and evolve into trading ranges. Typically, they work their way down to the bottom of the channel. And all channels, whether or not they're in a spike in channel pattern, usually have an opposite breakout, and then they evolve into a channel. Remember the market cycle. You have a strong breakout. It weakens with the pullback, enters the channel, and then eventually becomes the trading range. And that is what happened here. So a bull breakout, you can call it a spike, first push, second push, third push, a bear breakout below the channel. I don't have the trend line drawn in. And then a couple of legs down, testing the beginning of the channel. And then the channel evolved into a trading range. Just like the bulls are losing confidence that the trend will go much higher, the bears also doubt that it will go much higher. And they therefore begin to sell above prior highs and scale in higher for scalps. The bear would sell over here, maybe add on here, and then take profits when the market came back to their first entry. And then they get out break even on the first entry, and then with a profit on their second entry. Again, here, they sell here, sell more higher, and then buy back their shorts at the first entry. Break even on the first entry, and then a scalp on their second entry. Here's a bear channel. We have a bear breakout, a big bear trend bar. And then a channel. Three pushes down, one, two, three. Possibly a type of spike in channel pattern. Strong bear breakout. Bears are selling pullbacks. Every pullback they see as a bear flag. And they'll sell below the low of the prior bar. They'll get filled here. Usually higher probability to sell below a bear bar. So a lot of bears, instead of selling below that bull bar, will sell below this bear bar and get filled here. Here, they'll sell either below that bar or below this bear bar. Again, below a bear bar. Expecting at least a new low. The bears, instead of selling at new lows, they're taking profits at new lows. That's why we're getting these reversals up. New low, and the market goes up. The bears are not selling there. They're buying. They're buying back their shorts. They're losing confidence that the trend will continue much further. They think that the channel might soon evolve into a trading range. And therefore, you get a stairs pattern. Every breakout has a breakout point. The market comes back above the breakout point. We have a breakout. The market continues down a little bit, but comes back above the breakout point. That's a stairs pattern. And it's usually a sign that the channel is weakening and will soon evolve into a trading range. Very often, when you have a spike in channel bear trend like this, before the market gets all the way up to the top of the channel, it'll go sideways around halfway up and then decide whether to resume down or retrace all the way to the top of the channel and then form a trading range. The bulls also see what's going on. They see that when the market goes to a new low, there's buying going on. They know the bears are not selling that low. They see the bears are taking profits. And that gives the bulls confidence that the trend will not continue down much longer. And they begin to buy at the prior low and scale in lower for scalps. They place a limit order to buy at this low. And then they'll buy more. Usually the size of the minimum scalp lower. So if it's a Forex chart, the minimum scalp is 10 pips. They'll buy here. If it goes up 10 pips, they scalp out. If it instead first goes down 10 pips more, they'll buy more and then get out at their first entry break even. And then with 10 pips profit on their lower entry. Most bear channels. Here's a bear channel. We have a bear breakout, a spike, and then a pullback. That's the start of a channel. Most bear channels have bull breakouts. And therefore, even if the market is in a bear trend, a bear channel is a bear trend. Traders should look at bear channels and see them as a bear trend. And then see them as bull flags because most have a bull breakout. And the same is true for bull channels. Whether or not it's a bull channel in a bull trend or a pullback in a bear trend. Traders should see them as bear flags and expect a bear breakout. We have a bear trend, bear breakout and channel. However, I always think of it as a bull flag because the odds are it's going to have a bull breakout. Bear channel, bull flag because probably we'll have a bull breakout, which it did here. Here we have a strong bull breakout. And then a pullback. And then a channel. Overlapping bars. Some bear bars. Pullback, pullback, pullback, pullback. So it's a bull channel. It's a bull channel and a bull trend. However, the odds favor a bear breakout. Whenever I see a bull channel, I always think of it as a bear flag even though it's not a bear flag. It's a bull channel and a bull trend. However, the odds favor a bear breakout. Whenever I see a bull channel, I always think of it as a bear flag even though it's not a bear flag. It's a bull channel and a bull trend. The odds are it's going to eventually get a bear breakout. Bull channel, bear flag. And we got a bear breakout below the bottom of the bull channel. So spike, pullback, channel. Probably going to be a bear breakout. And then we have a trading range. The market cycle. Breakout, channel, and then trading range. This is a very strong bull trend. It's in a channel. It's probably a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. This is the dollar versus the yen. A five minute chart. However, 75% of the time, if you have a bull channel, even if it's tight, strong, it'll have a bear breakout. Only 25% of the time will it get a bull breakout. And the market cycle then begins over again. Breakout and then another channel and eventually a trading range. As strong as this bull trend is, we got a bear breakout. The bear breakout was not a bear trend. It was a sideways tight trading range. And that is common. But it's still a bear breakout. Here's the bull trend line, the bottom of the channel. And by the market simply going sideways, it broke below the bottom of the channel. Again, we have a bull channel, a bull trend, and we're starting to get a bear breakout. This bull channel had a bear breakout by going mostly sideways and went down a little bit, but it was mostly sideways. And it entered a trading range. Market cycle. You have a strong bull trend here, a pullback, a strong bull trend here, pullback, and then a channel. And channels usually evolve into trading ranges. Sometimes it's a tight trading range. Sometimes the channel goes all the way down to the bottom of the channel here or here, and then enters a trading range. Once the market's in a trading range, 20 or more bars of sideways to down trading, it enters breakout mode. And at that point, it has just about the same chance of trend resumption up as it does trend reversal down. In general, if you have a trading range and a bull trend, the odds are slightly higher that you'll get trend resumption up. And slightly lower that you'll get a trend reversal down. But at some point, if the trading range grows to 20, 30, 40 bars, the probability becomes the same for a resumption of the bull trend or a reversal into a bear trend. The bulls see a trading range as a double bottom bull flag. The bears see the trading range as some kind of a major trend reversal, like here, a double top, lower high, major trend reversal. Bull breakout, pullback, and then you expect a channel. Now you expect to be a breakout and then the evolution to a trading range. Sometimes, however, you'll get the bear breakout and it begins a bear trend. Here we have a breakout, not particularly strong. Some follow through selling, not particularly strong, but it just kept going on and on and on for 40 or 50 bars. So we have a wedge top, one, two, three, four, and then a bear breakout. This is the give up bar, the breakout bar, and then an endless pullback. After some point, after 20 or 30 bars, you have to conclude that it's a bear trend and not simply a bear leg in a developing trading range. A lot of times with these wedge tops, the second leg is very strong and traders start the count over again. So instead of one, two, three, they say one and then, oh, strong bull trend, maybe one, two, three. Another way to look at it is a wedge, one, two, three, that broke to the upside. If you have a wedge top and a bull breakout, 50% of the time, you'll get a stronger trend up. 50% of the time, the breakout will fail, and then the wedge top will lead to a reversal down. Gap. So there's a spike here, even though you do not see it. I think of a gap as an invisible trend bar, and then three pushes down, one, two, three. It's a bear channel and it's converging, so it's a wedge bear channel. And like all bear channels, 75% chance you're going to get a bull breakout above the bear trend line. If it's a wedge bottom and the shape is pretty good, instead of simply an evolution into a trading range, you can get the start of a bull trend. Here we started to evolve into a trading range, but then we get a pretty good bull breakout. We tried to form a trading range here, but we just kept going higher. Is the whole thing a trading range? Yes, it is, but you can also call it a bull trend. We have three pushes up, one, pull back two, pull back three. After a wedge bottom, one, two, three, we have a wedge rally, one, two, three. It went above the top of the bear channel and formed a double top, this high and that high. And it evolved into a trading range. Is this a bull trend or is it simply a bull leg in a trading range? You can call it a bull trend. It went up a lot of bars pretty fast, but you can also call it a bull leg in what became a trading range. We have a very tight bear channel. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. You could simply call this the breakout and you could say the channel began here, but we have a fairly tight channel and then a bull breakout above that tight channel. So you can say that the channel began here. Doesn't matter. It's still a fairly tight bear channel trying to get a bear breakout, but you know that even a tight bear channel, 75% chance you're going to get a bull breakout. It can break to the upside either by going sideways or by going up. So every bear channel, no matter how tight, no matter how strong, I think of it as a bull flag because the odds are you're going to get a bull breakout. Here we went sideways for a few bars and then eventually worked higher and got a bull breakout above the top of the bear trend line. Most channel breakouts usually fail. Bear channel and we try to break below the bottom and we got a micro double bottom down and up, down and up. This looks like a potential failed breakout below a bear channel. When you do get a break up above or below a channel, the breakout usually fails within about five bars. And 75% of the time it fails. I always look at the highest timeframe chart that shows the channel. For example, let's say this is a five minute forex chart. If I looked at a one minute forex chart, these two bars would be 10 bars instead of two bars. And therefore the failed breakout would be occurring in 10 bars. However, I always look at the highest timeframe chart that clearly shows the channel. And on that chart, 75% of the time, the breakout will reverse up within about five bars. Breakout below a bear channel. And we reversed up and we reversed up a second time. It looks like the bear breakout is failing, which it did. We're testing the top of the channel. Is there a 75% chance the breakout of the top of the channel will fail? In general, yes. But if it's following a reversal up from the bottom of the channel and the reversal up is strong, the chance that the breakout above the top of the channel will fail is much less. To me, I'm assuming that this is the start of a new trend and that the channel phase is over. The bear channel has ended. The goal after a failed bear breakout below the bottom of a channel, the test of the top of the channel. That's the minimum goal. Here, we got much more than that. We got a breakout into a bull trend. A breakout into a bull trend. You have to assume the market cycle is starting over again. So bull breakout and then we'll get a pullback and then a channel. Here, let's say we're looking at this chart and we're getting a bear breakout below the bottom of the channel. Yet the bear breakout is continuing. And that is far more than five bars before the breakout fails and reverses up. This is a two minute chart. This is a 30 minute chart. And it took 30 bars before the bear breakout failed and reversed up. However, I'm always interested in the highest timeframe chart that shows the pattern. And if you look at this, this is exactly this chart. This is a two minute chart. This is a 30 minute chart. And it shows the same breakout. And the reversal up occurred within three bars. One, two, three. So bear breakout and the bear breakout failed within five bars. In this case, it failed within three bars. Always look at the highest timeframe chart that shows the pattern. 75% chance that the bear breakout will fail within about five bars. And then test the opposite side of the channel. The minimum goal when you have a reversal from one side of the channel is a test of the opposite side of the channel. That's the minimum goal. We have a breakout here and then a bear bar, a pullback. So maybe the start of a channel. And we did get a channel. And here we have a bear breakout below the bottom of a bull channel. Does that mean you're going to make money if you sell the breakout below the channel? No, not at all. When a channel is very tight like this, the chance of making money selling is small. Expect that any reversal is going to be minor. And it's very difficult to make money betting on a minor reversal. Just because you know the odds are it's going to break below the bull trend line does not mean it will go far enough down for you to make money selling. But when there's a very tight bull channel, it's a very strong bull trend. It's better only to be looking to buy. Trying to reverse down after about a 10 bar bull micro channel. Chances are the bear reversal will become a bull flag. Traders will look to buy on a stop above a bull bar on the reversal up. They'll buy above the high of any bar on the reversal up. In fact, traders will buy below bars betting that the reversal down will fail. I said that 75% of breakouts of channels reverse, but sometimes they succeed. If you have a bull channel, sometimes you get a successful bull breakout. If you have a bear channel, sometimes you get a successful bear breakout. And then the market cycle starts over again. Breakout, new channel, and then trading range. We have a bear channel, wedge shape, but it looks like a bull channel. But it looks like we're trying to get a bear breakout. 75% chance a bear breakout or a bull breakout of a channel is going to fail within about 5 bars. Here we're trying to get a wedge bottom, 1, 2, 3, and we're trying to reverse up. The reversal up failed, and some bulls will put stops below this bar. Whenever you have a wedge bottom, or any kind of a bottom where there's a clear place for a stop, and then the stop gets hit, half of the time you'll go down for a swing, half of the time the bear breakout will fail, and the market will reverse up. In this particular case, we broke out, and we broke out a second time, and we created a bull IOI. We have a bull inside bar, following an outside bar. So a second entry buy. Some traders would buy above this bar. Other traders would say, a single bull bar is not enough to reverse such a big bear bar. Chances are you'll get at least a small second leg down. The bear's got it here. Then this is a second failed bear breakout. This is a higher probability buy. Looking for a test to the top of the channel. Think about what's happening here. We have a reversal up, reversal up. You can draw a line. One, two, and then you wait to see what happens on the third test of the line. And we tried to reverse up, but not a particularly good reversal. We have three decent bear bars here. And then look what the bears did next. A very strong bear bar. The bears are trying to get a bear breakout below a wedge bottom, hoping for a measured move down. But look at the follow through. Terrible follow through after a bear breakout. Strong enough bear bar to expect at least a small second leg down. And the bears got their minimum, a small second leg down. And look at that follow through. Another big bull bar. This is probably going to be a failed breakout below a wedge bottom. And the minimum objective would be some kind of a reversal up, probably with two legs up. Here's the first bear breakout. And most bear breakouts below channels fail. And usually the reversal up occurs within five bars. Here it occurred within six bars. One, two, three, four, five, six. Micro double bottom. Down, up, down, up. Bull bar here. Bigger bull bar here. The bear breakout below the wedge bottom. Looks like it's failing. This is a reasonable buy. Looking for at least two legs up. One, pull back, two. Here we have a bull channel. Fairly tight bull channel. We have a bear breakout. And now it looks like we're trying to get a bull breakout above the top of the bull channel. Only 25% of the time will you see a successful breakout above a bull channel. This is an example. Three consecutive bull bars closing on their highs, good sized bodies. This is a breakout and it appears that it's going to be successful. We have some hesitation and then you can call this a channel. So spike and then pull back and then maybe channel and then eventually a trading range. Because there's a bull breakout, you have to be thinking that the market cycle is starting over again. So breakout and then channel and eventually a trading range. In general after there's any kind of a breakout or a reversal, Traders expect about 10 bars and two legs as their minimum objective. So bull breakout and then pull back and second leg. This breakout was so strong that it may have a second leg up. Pull, breakout, pull back and maybe one more leg up. Don't know. But the minimum objective when you have any kind of reversal or any kind of a breakout is 10 bars and two legs. We've got a bear channel, two reversals, draw a line. The market reversed up again at that line. But then it did this. Three consecutive bear bars closing below their mid points. One closing on its low. Decent sized bear bodies, especially compared to the size of the bull and bear bodies here. This looks like a breakout. And a breakout, you have to be thinking market cycle. Breakout, pull back and then channel. Only 25% of the time when you have a bear channel, will you see a successful breakout below the channel. A breakout begins the market cycle over again. So you think breakout, pull back, channel and then eventually trading range. Minimum objective, 10 bars, two legs, sideways to down. 10 bars, two legs, TBTL. We have one leg down here, maybe one leg down here. And then pull back and then second leg down. Bear channel. Two reversals, draw a line, reversed up here. Broke below it, reversed up, reversed up, reversed up. So it looks like it's respecting the bottom of the channel. Bear channel, gold flag. 75% chance this bear channel is going to evolve into a trading range. Only 25% chance will the bears get a successful bear breakout and then another bear channel. This is an example of that 25%. I like to see consecutive big bear bars. Big bear bar, follow through big bear bar. When I see that, I think of it as the market cycle starting over again. Breakout and then pull back by going sideways and then channel down. So instead of a bull breakout in the bear channel, we've got a bear breakout below the bear channel. And the market cycle starts over again. Breakout, pull back and then channel. And then eventually a trading range. Breakout and then channel. You expect a bull breakout, which the market gave us by going mostly sideways. Not a bull trend, simply a sideways breakout above the top of the bear channel. Trading range. So market cycle, bear breakout, channel, and then evolution into a trading range. After about 20 bars, breakout mode, the probability of reversal up becomes about the same as the probability of trend resumption down. This is the 1987 crash. I began trading right before that. And this was a devastating emotional shock to everyone who was trading at the time. It was interesting. On that day, I was short 13 S&P 500 futures, which is now the equivalent of five times that 65 E-mini contracts. The price is much less, but it's the equivalent of 65 E-mini contracts. And I had to go to the office to do surgery that day, eye surgery. And I got out. I actually lost, I think, $5,000 on the day. Had I stayed and traded and just held until the close, I would have made $400,000. And that's in 1987 dollars. That would be about a million dollars in today's dollars. In any case, what I'm trying to illustrate here is we have a channel. 75% chance you'll get a bear breakout and then the evolution into a trading range. But there's a 25% chance you'll get a bull breakout and then the start of a new market cycle. This is 1995 after the Republicans took over the House of Representatives in 1995. Eight consecutive bull bars closing on or near their highs. Very strong bull breakout. Chances are we're going to get some kind of a measured move up. It's a low probability event. It should not have happened. Chances are we were going to get a bear breakout below the channel. Instead, we're getting a bull breakout. And not only a bull breakout, an exceptionally strong bull breakout. You cannot deny it. You have to look at that and say, that should not be happening. When something happens that should not be happening, there's going to be strong follow-through. Here's that same chart, but zoomed out. Here are those eight bear bars on the monthly chart. And the market just kept going up. The divided quarter will ensure which is required to see there will be something increase up. We're starting to go under when we get this lumps. It was a counter- Zoo which will not be going down to meet the goals of the 10-1400. We entered your problem with that return to the roll button. We entered the front- pro mu snapshot of the model of the report as well for a couple of Positions to receive some work. Probably 1-1500 points from the informations of our extended direction of the stock. But if this is going to be a 20-1400. here and this is what followed. The S&P went from 400 to 1500 over the course of the next five years or so. We had a bull channel. Expect bear flag bear breakout. When you get a bull breakout, especially if it looks particularly strong, you're probably going to get good follow-through. This is unusual. However, you cannot deny it. Once you start to see five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten bull bars breaking above the top of a bull channel, you have to assume that the market has changed. Here we got a 300% gain in the S&P over the next four years. Bull channel. Usually you get a bear breakout and then a trading range. But here we have a bull channel and we got a bull breakout. So the market cycle starts over again. Very strong bull breakout. Micro channel. Little pullback. Very tight channel. Then a bigger pullback and then more bear bars and more pullbacks. Very tight bull channel. A breakout on a higher time frame chart. We got a bear breakout below the bull channel. But look what happened. It reversed up strongly and you could then draw a broader bull channel. New market cycle. Whenever you get a bull breakout, you got to be thinking about a new market cycle. Breakout and then channel and then eventually a trading range. Clearly a very strong bull breakout here. But in fact, you could argue that this entire rally for three years is the breakout. This is a monthly chart. If you looked at a higher time frame chart, like every bar being six months or every bar being one year, this entire three year rally would probably be simply a strong bull breakout. And this is a big enough pullback. You'd think that the channel began right here. And market cycle. Breakout, pullback, and then a channel. And then the channel gets a bear breakout. And then the market evolves into a trading range. And then the market evolves into a bull channel. And then the market evolves into a bull channel. Again, remember we had a bull channel here after the 87 crash. And then a very strong bull breakout. A low probability event. Whenever a low probability event happens, you get bulls trapped out. They're in denial. They don't buy. You have bears trapped in. They're selling above the bear channel, betting that the the breakout will fail. So both are trapped. And both are hoping for any kind of a pullback. The bulls want to pull back so they can finally buy. And the bears want to pull back so they can exit with a smaller loss. The result is the first reversal down. Traders will buy it. Bulls will buy it to get long. Bears will buy it to exit losing shorts. Minimum goal two legs up. Is this the first leg? Pullback, second leg? Well, you could argue it is. You could also say that if you're using different time frame charts. First leg up, pullback, second leg up. Doesn't matter. Minimum goal is 10 bars, two legs. We got far more than that on the monthly chart. On a higher time frame chart, like a yearly chart, this whole thing would be the breakout phase. And this would be the pullback. Leg one, pullback, leg two. Whenever there's any kind of a pullback, here we have a pullback. I look to the left to see if it stays above the breakout point, which it did here. So you've got to be thinking that maybe this gap between this low and that high is a measuring gap. I'll look at the start of the move and then the top of the first leg and project up for a measured move, knowing that a lot of bulls will begin to take profits there. Aggressive bears will short there, but when a channel is this strong, it's better only to be looking to buy. Here's the same chart, the 87 crash. At the time it was huge. The market fell 25% in one day. But when you look back now, so many years later, 30 years later, it looks minor. In any case, we have a bull channel and then a bull breakout. And then we have another bull channel. And this bull channel did get a bear breakout. In fact, this was a devastating correction. It's a loss of about 50% and it's about a 50% pullback from this rally. This is a spike pullback channel. We have a bear breakout below the bull channel, which happens 75% of the time. And then the market typically comes down to the bottom of the channel. Here we went a little bit below. Bull breakout pullback channel usually evolves into a trading range. And this trading range lasted 15 years. And eventually we got trend resumption up. Here's the dollar versus the Canadian dollar, a 480 minute chart. We have a bull breakout and then a pullback and then a channel. 75% chance, bull channel, bear flag. 75% chance, we get a bear breakout and the evolution into a trading range. 25% chance, we get a bull breakout and the market cycle starts over again. And that's what happened. Bull breakout channel, instead of a trading range, you can say that this is a trading range, but you can also say it's still a bull channel. We got a very strong bull breakout, 25% of the time. That's what happens. You get a bull channel and you get a bull breakout and the market cycle starts over again, break up a pullback and then channel, and then eventually a trading range. And then you expect that channel eventually to evolve into a trading range. That is the market cycle. That's how markets typically behave. bull breakout, pullback, a channel, a broader channel, and then eventually a trading range. And after the trading range, especially one that lasts 40 or 50 bars like this, 50-50 chance, there'll be trend resumption up. The bulls will see a triangle or maybe a double bottom bull flag, and the bears will see a major trend reversal, like a double top lower high, and then the bears will see a trend reversal. And they'll look for trend reversal down. market cycle. bull breakout channel. bull breakout channel. Maybe trading range, or maybe just bull breakout channel, and then bull breakout again. 25% of the time you get that. The market cycle starts over again. Bull breakout channel, and then trading range. And then the market waits for a breakout up or down, and then the market cycle will start over again. Bull channel. So bear flag, but then we've got a strong bull breakout. So you have trapped bulls and bears. Bulls were hoping for evolution into a trading range. That would allow them to buy lower. So you have a lot of bulls who are trapped out. And you have bears who have been selling every new high, betting that the market would evolve into a trading range. And they are trapped in. And both are hoping for any kind of a pullback, even a small one, so they could buy. The bulls buy to get long. The bears sell to exit with a smaller loss. And because you have bulls and bears eager to buy after this kind of a strong breakout, you usually get at least a small second leg up. So let's look at the bulls and bears. And here is what could have been the top of the channel and the start of a trading range. Instead, we've got a bull breakout. And I'm always looking at measured move targets. I might look at a measured move based upon the bottom of the channel to the top of the channel or the top of the channel here. And if the breakout is strong enough then I'll look maybe at the bottom of the entire pattern to the top of the entire pattern and look for a measured move up. And you can see traders started to take profits at that measured move target. Very strong bull breakout. Did the channel begin here? Maybe, maybe it just rounded up and accelerated up. Is this a strong bull breakout? And then a pullback that lasted 15, 20 bars, and then the channel began. Some computers see it one way, other computers see it the other way. I tend to think of this as part of the channel. That the channel began either here or here. And it's a horizontal channel. If the pullback goes sideways for 20 or 30 bars, then the probability of trend resumption up drops to about the same as the probability of trend reversal down. Here, we lasted about 15 bars or so. I still think the probability favored trend resumption up. I said that whenever you have a bull breakout and then a channel, maybe this is the channel. Only 25% chance of a bull breakout. However, if the channel is not clear and it's mostly horizontal, the chance of a bull breakout is much higher than just 25%. It's probably closer to 50%. This becomes more of a trend resumption, trend reversal setup. So bull breakout pullback. Is this a channel? Is it a trading range? I don't know. But the flatter it is, the more the probability is that there'll be a 50% chance of trend resumption up, a bull breakout above the bull channel and not just a 25% chance. A bull channel, but pretty flat. And therefore, instead of a 75% chance of a bear breakout, it's probably closer to 50-50 that you'll get a bear breakout or a bull breakout. In this video, I talked about the evolution of channels into trading ranges. I made the point that 75% of channel breakouts up or down fail, usually within five bars. However, 25% of the time, you'll get a bull breakout above a bull channel or a bear breakout below a bear channel. And then the market cycle starts over again, breakout, new channel, and then trading range. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fifth of six videos on channels.