 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading major trend reversal bottoms. I want to talk a little bit about minor reversals in contrast to major reversals. Also, I think it's very important to understand that there is no best setup. However, good setups come every two or three bars. And when you're in any trade, you always have to have a plan to take profits. This is the E-mini five minute chart. Very tight bear channel. When a channel is this tight, it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Here we have a little pullback, a little pullback, a little pullback, but the pullbacks are only lasting a bar or two. These pullbacks are all minor. And on a 15 minute or a 30 minute chart, there would be no pullbacks at all. It would simply be a series of strong bear bars. And that means it's a breakout on the next higher timeframe. If the market's in a strong bear breakout, you cannot buy. You can only look to sell until there's significant buying pressure. A beginner will look at these four bull bars and say, wow, it's becoming a bull trend. But it's not. Beginners are constantly buying reversals, believing that the trend has ended and they want to get in as early as possible, because then they're risking less money. And beginners just think about risk all the time. They ignore reward and probability. The probability of this becoming a bull trend is very, very small. More likely it's a minor reversal and bears will sell it. What causes it? Well, the bears have a stop that's very far away. Their risk is getting greater. They want to reduce the risk. They have to take some profits. Bull scalpers might be buying as well, looking for a test of the moving average. They're not looking for a bull trend. When it gets to the moving average, the bulls take their profits. And the bears who are selling far below an average price for all of these bars, finally get a chance to sell at the average price. They're going to take it as they did here, here, here, here, here. Beginners see all of these reversals as potential major reversals, but they're not. They're minor. The bulls need to develop more buying pressure before they can get a major reversal. Beginner buys here. We have a break above the bear channel. We tested the moving average. Good for the bulls. We have four consecutive bull bars. Good for the bulls. We have a higher low with a weak sell off, a bull bar closing on its high. And now we even have a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. But it's probably minor because four bull bars is not enough buying pressure. If the four bull bars were very, very big, that would be enough. But look at the size of these bodies. They're getting smaller, smaller, smaller. This is not enough buying pressure for traders to believe the bulls can take control and create a bull trend. They might be able to create a trading range after this buying pressure, but a bull trend is not likely. A minor reversal, in my mind, is a reversal that you're ignoring if you're trading always in short. In other words, it's what traders sometimes refer to as noise. They'll look at this and say, oh, that's just noise. I don't use the term noise. I use the term minor reversal. Basically, noise is a reversal that is too small for you to take action. Now, we broke above the bull trend line. We have a higher low, not a particularly strong sell-off. We have a good buy signal bar. We have a lower low. It's not a particularly strong sell-off. We have a good buy signal bar. Is this a major trend reversal? Well, you still have the problem of this. This is just not enough buying pressure. If this rally went far above this high, then this could be a major reversal. But it's probably still minor. The channel here is tight. The channel starting here is tight. And the four bull bars with shrinking bodies is probably not enough to lead to a bull trend. What about here? Now we have a double bottom or a slightly higher low double bottom. Again, a bull bar. We're starting to go sideways. We have a tight trading range. Still probably minor. And this is probably minor as well, even though we did get a pretty good swing up here. When an expert looks at all of these reversals, he sees bears taking profits to reduce their risk. reduce their risk. And he sees also bears are selling every time it gets back to an average price. Every time it gets near the moving average, the bears are selling. Shrinking bodies, loss of momentum on the part of the bulls. Plus, the size of the bull bodies is small compared to the size of the bear bodies. There's just not enough strength on the part of the bulls for traders to be looking for a bull trend. The market has been below the moving average for a long time. Traders have been willing to sell far below the average price for a lot of bars. What's going to happen when it gets to the average price? They're going to say, wow, I've been willing to sell below average price. And now I finally get to sell way up there at the average price. I'm going to sell. And the bears did that repeatedly. A 20 gap bar test of the moving average. There's a gap between the high of this bar and the moving average. 20 or more bars have had gaps to the moving average. Whenever you get to the moving average, bears are going to sell. And the bull scalpers who bought for any reason, they're going to take profits because they know they will be overwhelmed by the bears. And they know it's very unlikely that they're going to get a major reversal. And therefore, the best they're getting is a bear flag or a bull leg in a trading range, and the market's going lower. Traders are selling at the moving average with limit orders. They're selling bull closes at the moving average. They're selling reversals down at the moving average, especially below a bear bar here, below a bear bar here, below a bear bar here, below this bar as well. They'll sell that too. They see it's weakening and we're starting to go sideways into a tight trading range. But until there's a clear reversal, they're going to continue to sell. Very strong bear trend. And we have an attempt at a double bottom, a slightly lower low double bottom. Two consecutive bull bars. Pretty good sized bull bars. This bull bar is bigger than all the bear bars for the past 10 bars, maybe even bigger than that. Pretty good buying pressure. Is that enough for this to be a lower low major trend reversal? Well, this is a minor reversal. And would you buy above this bear bar? No, it's probably a minor reversal as well. Furthermore, these two bull bars, as strong as they are, never got to the moving average. This is a minor reversal. And initially, this is a minor reversal as well. Yet, look what we got. We have a minor reversal that leads to a strong bull trend. How can that happen? Sometimes a minor reversal can lead to a major trend change as it did here. Here we have another pair of very big bull bars. And these are even bigger than this. Therefore, this is a double bottom, slightly lower low, and a very strong reversal up. By the close of this bar, you have to assume the bulls are in control. The market's always in long, that we're going higher. Maybe for a measured move up, based upon the height of the double bottom. Here's the neckline, measured move up. Maybe based upon the open of the first bar to the close of the second bar of this strong reversal. That would be up here. When I call this a lower low major trend reversal, I would not. I would call it a double bottom and a minor reversal that is exceptionally strong. But you always have to look at other things as well. Sometimes it's better to look back at the past few days to see if this is part of a larger pattern. I would not call it a lower low major trend reversal. I would call it a minor reversal that was strong enough for me to buy. So at this point, I would assume that even though it looks like a minor reversal, it's probably going to turn into a major reversal. I would buy either above this bar bar, or the close of this bar, or the close of this bar, or the close of that follow-through bar. At this point, I believe the bulls have taken control, and that we're going up for at least a couple legs. Here's a second leg up, but it's strong enough with good follow-through, a bull body, to make me think we're still going higher. At this point, I think we're in a bull trend. I don't know if we'll simply test the low of this breakout point, or the top of this bare leg, but I think we're going higher. And therefore, I think a major reversal is underway, even though the setup itself is minor. If you look back over the past several days, this is what you see. We reversed up. We reversed up. Now we have a trend channel, and now we're reversing up again twice at the bottom of the channel. This little double bottom is this double bottom. If you only look at this chart, you'd say minor reversal. But if you look back over the past four days, you'd say, wait a minute, that's three reversals up. Therefore, this is a type of a wedge, even though it does not have a wedge shape. A wedge reversal with good buying pressure in the wedge is a major reversal, looking for at least a test at the top of the wedge, which we got right here. Therefore, looking at this, I would not call it a major trend reversal. However, looking at the past four days, I would say it's basically a wedge bottom. It's a second strong reversal up from the bottom of a four-day bull channel. We're probably going to go up to the top of the bull channel, which is up here. And therefore, I would trade this as a major reversal, even though just looking at this, it appears minor. Beginners are always wanting best setups, perfect trades, but there cannot be a perfect trade, because if there was an easy way to see that a trade is perfect, everyone would take it, and no one would take the opposite side, and therefore the trade would not move. It would not work. There's no best setup, but you should never worry about entering late. There are good setups every few bars. At this point, you say, we're going higher. I got a buy. Even though it's been about 20 bars since touching the moving average, the context is very good. Bottom of a channel, and we're reversing up twice, and both reversals are strong. And now we have a couple very strong bull bars following another pair of very strong bull bars, so we're probably going higher. Therefore, you can buy for any reason. You can buy at the market. You can buy bull closes. You can buy bear closes. You can buy below bars. You can buy above bars. You need to get long. Stop down here. It does not matter if you did not take this buy or that buy. It does not matter. We're going higher, and therefore, you have to buy. The minimum target to make the trade mathematically good, to have a positive trader's equation, is two times the actual risk. If you bought above the high of this bar, you get filled over here, and by the close of this bar, you know that you only had to risk a very little amount to stay in the trade. So if you bought above the high of this bar, you get filled here, and you put your stop right here, not knowing where the bottom of this bar would be, you would not have been stopped out. So your actual risk would have been very, very tiny. Two times your actual risk would be right here. Is that a good location to take profits? Mathematically, it gives you a positive trader's equation, and therefore, it is acceptable to do that. If you do that with 100 trades that look similar to this, you will make money. But going for the minimum is rarely ever the best. And when you have a reversal that's big like this, and you have very small actual risk, you have to go for far more profit than the actual risk. You can continue to hold until there's some reasonable setup that tells you that your premise is no longer valid. Even through here, this looks like a minor reversal down, and bulls could continue to hold until the end of the day. They would make, in this trade, 25 points or so, 35 points, which is 10, 20, 30 times bigger than their actual risk. I said there are many setups occurring all day long. Every setup has a trade-off between probability and risk-reward ratio. Some have very high probability. For example, buying this clothes has a very high probability of some kind of a measured move up, maybe based upon the neckline of this double bottom. Maybe we'll go for a measured move up there. Maybe based upon the bodies of these two consecutive bull bars, maybe we'll go up here. In any case, this has a high probability of making profit. But the stop is far, so the risk is great. Also, if you're entering here compared to entering here, there's less reward left in the trade. So entering here, you have a high probability trade, but the risk is great. And therefore, the risk-reward ratio is not all that good. That's the trade-off. Whenever you take a high probability trade, for example, buying this clothes or buying this clothes, your stop is down here. Your risk is great. There's always a trade-off. If you get high probability, the firm taking the opposite side of your trade has great risk-reward. If you take a trade that has great risk-reward, for example, let's say you placed a limit order to buy at the low of this bar. You have low probability of success, but maybe you have a very tight stop. Your risk-reward is very good. Huge reward, small risk, but low probability. Every trade has a trade-off between probability and risk-reward. No trade is perfect. Again, there are setups all day long. When you have a strong bull trend like this, you can take these buys. You can buy below bars. You can buy a strong bear close, betting the bear reversal will fail. You can buy above a bar in a pullback, betting the pullback is a bull flag. Now we have a buy the close rally. You can buy any of these closes. Here the bears are trying to reverse down, but we get a close above the high of that bar. You can buy that. Again, buy below a bear bar. We have a high two buy with a decent bull body. You can buy there. We have a lower low, a failed breakout below the buy climax, and this forms a double bottom, and we're reversing up. It's a 20 gap bar buy. It's been about 20 bars since the market has been to the moving average. We have a bull bar after the bear breakout. It's a failed bear breakout. Buy above that. Strong bull close. You can buy that close. You can buy below this bear bar. We have a high one buy with a good bull bar. You buy that. We have a high one buy here. You can see every bar or two or three. There's a good reason to enter a trade. And in a bear trend, it's the opposite. You can sell all day long. The lower down that you're selling, the risk is greater, but the probability of making a profit is high. The later you're taking the buys here, the stop gets further away. Your risk is greater, but your probability is very high. Sometimes you can have a great setup and you lose money. That's because there is no perfect trade. We have a bear trend. Pretty good breakout. We have several good bull bars. Here it's basically a trading range. Very weak sell off. And now we're getting a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. We had two legs up. We have a gap bar. A bar with a gap between the low of the bar and the moving average. That's a sign that the bulls are strong. They were strong enough to put a bar completely above the moving average. And we have a decent buy signal bar here and here. This is a good looking, high or low, major trend reversal. Your stop choice is either below the double bottom or below the bottom of the bull breakout. Good buying pressure here. Strong bull reversal here. Decent follow through. Another bull bar here. Closing of the highs of the past 10 bars. More bull bars here. The bull bars are closing on their highs. Moving average gap bar. Usually leads to the final bear leg before an attempt at a major trend reversal. A second entry buy. This is strong enough down so most traders will want a second entry buy. And they have it here with a decent buy signal bar as well. But you get this. You get stopped out with a loss. And that's going to happen because a major trend reversal bottom usually has about a 40% chance of a swing up and a 60% chance of a small loss or a small win. This is an example of a small loss. A lot of the bulls might get out below this bar. A double top bear flag at the moving average with the bear bar closing on its low. Some will get out below this double bottom. So it's a small loss. Or below the bottom of the bull reversal. Small loss. And what did it lead to? A second attempt at a bottom. The bulls had a reasonable bottom here. The bears got resumption down. But now we're getting a second attempt at a bottom. And a lot of bulls will buy above here or above here. Taking a chance that the second reversal will be successful. This is an attempt at a higher low major trend reversal. And now this is a lower low major trend reversal. You get stopped out and a small loss relative to the potential gain. The loss is small. That happens 60% of the time. You either get stopped out for a small loss or you make a small profit. And then you give up on the trade. The trade just does not go up. So What took place here? Well, we have a double bottom and you have a breakout. Whenever you have a breakout below a stop, either here or here, 50% chance you're going to get a measure move down. 50% chance you're going to get a reversal up. Whenever you have a double bottom and a breakout, you have a potential wedge reversal. The double bottom has one push up, two pushes up. The bare breakout, if it reverses, then we have three pushes up. Even though it's not wedge shaped, it functions like a wedge. It's a wedge variant. A breakout below a double bottom that reverses up is a type of a wedge. And therefore, it can lead to a significant reversal. Look what happened here. The bulls are trying to reverse up from above yesterday's low and they failed. We broke below yesterday's low. And what happened? We reversed up at yesterday's low. This was the test of yesterday's low. The bulls trying to get a higher low. They failed. However, the bears failed to get much of a breakout below yesterday's low. And therefore, traders will look for another reversal up. This would be a second entry buy. You can draw a bear channel using the bear trend line and creating a parallel. And we're also at the bottom of that bear channel. As I said, whenever the market runs a stop, anytime your stop is hit, 50% chance it's going to reverse up again. And therefore, you have to be ready to buy again for a second reversal up. You can take the first reversal up. Here we have a second entry buy. This is a higher probability buy. Whenever you take a trade, you have to have a plan to take profits. Otherwise, there's too much risk that your profits will eventually disappear. Let's say you took the buy either above this bar or above that bar, looking for a swing up. Minimum target is always at least two times your actual risk. And therefore, it's always acceptable to take partial profits, like one quarter or half of your profits, or even all of your profits, whenever the market reaches two times actual risk. Initial risk is always at least as big as actual risk. And therefore, it's always acceptable to take profits at two times initial risk. However, if the market looks like there's a reasonable expectation that it's going to go much further than two times actual or initial risk, you should hold on to your position. A minimum profit is rarely ever the best profit. Minimum simply means that if you take that trade 100 times and manage it, taking profits at two times actual risk, you will make money. Or you have a very high probability of making money. However, you will not make much money. For example, let's say you bought above the high of this bar. And you see it dipped below, but did not hit the stop. And then it went up here. Then your actual risk is to just below the low of this bar. So here's your actual risk, the height of this pink box. And then this is one times, this is two times actual risk. Mathematically, it's okay to take your entire profit right here. However, if you look at this and say, well, I don't know, the bulls tried to get a major trend reversal here, and now they're trying to get a major trend reversal again, I'm going to hold on to part of my trade because this could be a major reversal and not simply a minor reversal and a trading range. Here's two times initial risk. You bought above the high of this bar, let's say. Your initial risk is to where your stop is, which is just below the low of that bar. One times initial risk, two times initial risk. You could take profits here. However, would you? If you did, you'd say, wait a minute, this is a strong breakout with strong follow-through. This is a by-the-close bull trend. We're going higher. Maybe based upon a measured move from the open of the first bar of the breakout to the close of the final bar of the breakout, that takes us up here. So yes, you can take profits here, but we're probably going higher. And therefore, had you taken profits, you can look to buy again. Buy this close, buy that close, buy above this bear bar, buy above this bull bar, buy above this bull bar. Again, bear trend, bull breakout, tried to get a higher low major trend reversal. It failed. Now we get a lower low major trend reversal. You can also call this a triangle and a final flag, or simply a reversal up from below yesterday's low. The market often sells off down to yesterday's low and then reverses either from above yesterday's low or from below yesterday's low. Especially when there's a lot of trading range price action. Here's 30 bars in a fairly tight range with multiple reversals. This is probably a bear leg in what will become a trading range, which means you have to be expecting a bull leg. And therefore, you have to be looking for a reversal. When you get a strong breakout like this, you really need to be holding at least part of your position for some kind of a measured move up. If you do exit part or all, you should be looking to buy again. Again, a strong breakout like that often leads to a measured move up based upon the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar, which is right there. And you can see when we got to that area, traders took profits. A strong breakout like this has a 60% chance of at least some kind of a measured move up. Maybe based upon a double top. We have a double top here, neckline here. Instead of getting the bear breakout, we got the bull breakout. Therefore, traders will look for a measured move up based upon a measured move from this double top. Maybe based upon the height of this sell climax. Very strong bull bar, about 20 bars into the bull trend. The biggest bull bar occurring in the bull trend. Yet, we did not break above the high of the day. Whenever you get a very strong bull bar late in a bull trend, it's more likely going to lead to an exhaustion gap than to a measured move up. It's possible that we'll get a pullback here and a resumption up, and this will be a measuring gap. More likely, the gap between this low and this high, and then this low and this high, will be an exhaustion gap, and the gap will close. We'll trade below this high, and we'll probably trade down to the bottom of the buy climax. At that point, the market will either form a double bottom with this low and resume up, or maybe break to the downside and fall for a measured move based upon the height of that buy climax, which it did here. There's no perfect way to take profits, and you should never worry about being perfect. You should only worry about being good. Always be aware of what the minimum target is, that you need to have a profitable strategy, but the minimum is rarely ever the best. You usually can make more money by going for more than the minimum. In which case, look for other types of resistance, like prior highs. You can see there's some profit taking here, and also measured move projections. For example, leg one, leg two, leg one, pullback, leg two. You can do a measured move based upon the height of the bodies of this breakout. You can do a measured move based upon the height of a pullback. We have a pullback, and a measured move up takes us around here. And then also, as I said, you can always take profits at a measured move based upon initial or actual risk. Here we have a parabolic wedge, a very tight wedge, and the bearers tried to get a reversal, but a terrible entry bar, and therefore, it's probably a failed reversal, and we're probably going higher. And what do we have here? A strong vacuum test up to today's high. It may also be a test of yesterday's high. I don't see yesterday right here. But this could be a trading range day. Remember, this looks like a bear leg in a trading range. Therefore, it should be followed by a bull leg in what will become a trading range. We have big down, big up, a reversal, usually leads to a trading range. And now we have an exceptionally strong bull breakout, late in a bull trend, more likely an exhaustion gap. We're trying to break above the top of a wedge, and the bulls want a measured move up based upon the height of the wedge. They want us to get up here. However, the biggest breakout, late in a bull trend, more likely you're going to get a failed breakout. You have good follow-through here, but the second bar is bad follow-through. Sometimes you get the bad follow-through bar on the second bar. This is a reasonable location to take profits because this is a probable bi-climax, a test of the high of the day, and we're probably going to come down and test the bottom of the bi-climax. And it's three pushes up, one, two, three. Yes, it's a breakout above a wedge. Maybe we'll get two legs up. Well, we did get two legs up. We went up here and then down here and then up here and then down again. This is a micro double top and that might be all the bulls get. Once you have that bare bar closing below its midpoint, near its low, it's a good place to take profits because at that point, we're probably going down here. Most reversals end up forming large trading ranges and most major trend reversals usually result in a large trading range. A major trend reversal is a reversal and therefore you have a big down and big up. And big up after big down creates big confusion and usually a major reversal ends up going sideways. It still goes up far enough for a swing profit, but most reversals end up transitioning into trading ranges at some point. bull trends often end with some kind of a climax. And swing traders have to be aware of all this. We have three pushes up, one, two, three. You can call it a failed breakout above a wedge top, a buy vacuum test of the high of the day and high probability of a trading range day. We're at different measured move projections. Certainly based upon this, we're testing the high of the day and now we're reversing down. You have to have reasons to take profits because otherwise they will disappear. Could you buy this close and hold until the end of the day? You cannot do that. You have to have a sensible plan to take profits because they eventually always disappear. Okay. I began by talking about a minor reversal, which means a reversal that usually does not result in an opposite trend. It usually results in a pause in the current trend leading to a resumption of that trend. I also made the point that there are no best setups and that there are reasons to enter every few bars. Every trade has a trade-off between probability and risk-reward. And there are plenty of trading opportunities all day long. Finally, I talked about the importance of having profit targets. You have to have a plan to take profits because eventually they will disappear. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading major trend reversal bottoms.