 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on candles, setups, and signal bars. I'll begin by talking about trend bars and trading range bars. Every bar on every chart is either a trend bar or a trading range bar, just like every part of every chart is either a trend or a trading range. Next, I'll move on to talk about signal bars and entry bars. An entry bar is the bar when you placed a trade. The bar before it is the bar that made you want to place that trade. It's the signal bar. It signaled the trade. And finally, I'll talk about bad signal bars. Sometimes the context is very good for a trade, but the signal bar does not look very good. If the context is good, you have to take the trade. Look at these bars. There are some black ones and some white ones. The black ones are bear bars where the bar opened above the close, and the white ones are bull bars where the bar opened below the close. It closed above the open. So those are bull bars, and the black bars are bear bars. Some traders prefer to use green for bull bars and red for bear bars. But there's something else about these bars. Some of the bars have bodies that are small, smaller than half of the size of the height of the bar. And other bars have very small tails. For example, here's a tiny tail on the bottom of this bar, and there's no tail on the top of the bar. The bars that open at one end and close at the other end, where the bodies are at least half the size of the bar, and especially if the bars are relatively big, I call them trend bars. Big bodies and tails that are not particularly prominent. The bodies are at least half the size of the bar. Here are examples of trend bars. And the only other kind of bar that I see on a chart is a trading range bar, a bar in which the bulls and bears were about equal. They have smaller bodies, bodies that are typically less than half of the size of the entire bar. Sometimes a trading range bar can be a very big bar, as long as the body is relatively small compared to the height of the entire bar. So trading range bars like this, body is less than half the size of the bar. Some trading range bars have relatively big bodies compared to the size of the bar, but if the bar is small, I still call it a trading range bar. Other bars are extremely big, but have very small bodies. I call those trading range bars. Here are examples of trading range bars. You can see I have a mark on every bar on the chart. So every bar is either mostly a trend bar in which the market is going from one end to the other, or a trading range bar in which it goes both ways. And some bars are in between, and you can call them a trend bar. In certain circumstances, you can call them a trading range bar. But in general, I prefer to think of bars as either trend bars or trading range bars, just like I prefer to look at any chart as either in a trend or in a trading range. If you're not certain whether a bar is a trend bar or a trading range bar, look to the left. Look at the context. A small body in a strong trend is more of a trend bar. Here we have three consecutive bull bars, and they're all small, but the context is good. We have an II pattern. We broke out a little bit here, and we're starting to form higher lows and higher highs. So this is the early stages of a trend. Even though these bars are small, I would call them trend bars. Closed above the middle, closed above the middle, closed above the middle. Tails, not especially prominent, especially on the bottom. You know tails are very small tails. The bulls are beginning to get eager to buy. So those are trend bars. And a bigger body in a sideways market can still be a trading range bar. So look at this bar. Its body is as big as these. These are trend bars, yet this is a trading range bar. This is a trading range bar. It's coming in a series of bars that are mostly overlapping. Most of the bars have very prominent tails, and the bodies are less than half of the size of the entire bar. The context here makes me call this a trading range bar, even though its body is as big as the body of the bull bars here. These are trend bars. And these bars, even though the bodies are the same size as here, are trading range bars. They're occurring in a trading range. Every time the market goes up, it goes down. Every time it goes down, it goes up. So you've got five, six sideways bars closing in the middle. Prominent tails up and down, even though the bodies are relatively big compared to the bodies over here. The context here, we're sideways, sideways, sideways, sideways. We're not going up or down. The context is a trading range, and trading ranges are made up mostly of trading range bars. We have all kinds of things going on here. Take a look down here. These bars are not especially big, but look at the bottoms of the bars. The tails are either small or non-existent. And look at the closes of the bars. They're closing above the midpoint or near the high of the bar. And then there's not much overlap from one bar to the next. As soon as the bar closes, the other bar opens, and it goes up. As soon as this bar closes, the next bar opens, it goes up. So we're beginning to trend. Even though the bodies are small, they are at least half the size of the bar. And over here, here we have a big bull trend bar. We have a bear trend bar, a bull trend bar. Is this a trend bar or a trading range bar? I would call this a trend bar. However, it led to a trading range. And these next five bars, I think, are all trading range bars. Fairly prominent tails. Even though this bar has a big bear body, it did not close on its low. It closed back up near the midpoint of the bar. If it was truly bearish, it would have closed on the low. Instead, when the market got near the low, probably right before the close, the bulls bought it. And the bears bought it as well. The bears bought it because they were not confident that the market was going down. So the bears lacked conviction. Here we have a series of bear bars comparable to this series of bull bars. We have three or more consecutive bear bars closing below the midpoints. We're probably going to get more down. Once you get three or four consecutive bear bars in a bull trend, you're probably going to go at least a little bit lower. Even though these bars are small, they are trend bars. I would not call these first two bear bars trend bars until I see that third bar. It has a bigger bear body, so we're starting to accelerate down. And that tells me that these two bars, rather than being the start of a trading range, were instead the start of a bear trend. Sometimes it's very easy to call a bar a trend bar. Here are the bars of big bars closing on their lows, consecutive bars. As soon as the bar closes, the next bar immediately sells off. As soon as this bar closes, the next bar sells off. So the high of this bar does not go much above the close of that bar. As soon as they see a strong bear close, the bar closing on its low, they sell. They sell at the market. Or they'll place a limit order as soon as this bar closes to sell at that close. And the market immediately sells off. Starting to get prominent tails here and here. And then again here, prominent tails. Bars mostly overlapping sideways. We're starting to get some trading range price action there. I would call the price range. And then again, the price range is a little bit lower. I would call baby these two bars, trading range bars. The trend down is so strong, it's unlikely that we're going to go up very far. And the attempt at a trading range failed. We slipped down more. And then the attempt here at a trading range or a reversal also failed. And it became a bear flag. We paused. It's a pause. It's a trading range. A pullback. Remember a pullback is a small trading range. And a pullback often is made up of trading range bars. Now every bar is either a trend bar or a trading range bar. Trend bars close near the top or the bottom. They have small tails. And many of them have big bodies. We have a bull trend bar here and a bear trend. And then a series of bear trend bars. And then trading range bars start to become more prominent when the market feels complacent. There's no sense that the price is particularly wrong. There's no sense of urgency that the price has to quickly go to a better location like in here. The market. Any time it goes down a little. The bulls buy. The bear stop selling. Any time it goes up. The bear start to sell. The bulls stop buying. Traders know that the market is not going to go very far up or down. And the bars reflect that as well. Trading ranges usually are filled with lots of trading range bars. You can see how small the bars are. How prominent the tails are. Compare the size of these bars to these bars. Compare the prominent tails of these bars to these bars. Compare the prominent tails of these bars to these bars. Compare the amount of overlap of these bars to these bars. So not much overlap over here during a trend. And a lot of overlap during a trading range. Big tails. Small bodies. A lot of overlap with the prior bars. A lot of the bars closing in the middle. Trend bars quickly reverse. So we got a bull trend bar. Quickly became a bear trend bar. We have a bear trend bar. Quickly became a bull bar. Under trading range, you often get bull and bear bars. But they usually reverse within a bar or two. Something to realize about tails is that every tail once was a strong bull body. And when you look at this bar. At one point, this bar was that bar. At one point, the bar traded way up. And this bar only traded down to here. This bar also traded way up. But then traded all the way back down to the open. Every tail on top of a bar is an attempt at a breakout. That fails. It's a failed breakout. At one point, this doji bar was a strong bull trend bar. But the bulls lacked conviction. And the bears took control. So the bulls owned it for a while. The bears owned it for a while. And it's a balanced bar. And therefore, a one bar trading range. Trading range, you go up. You go down. On a smaller timeframe chart. If you go to a small enough timeframe chart, this might have had many reversals up and down. But in any case, it probably was a trading range on a smaller timeframe chart. Again, every tail on a bar is an attempt at a breakout. Here, the bulls tried to break out above this bar. It closed back below the high of that bar. Here, the bears tried to break down. They tried to reverse the market. It closed back above the low of that bar. Every tail is an attempt at a breakout that fails and reverses. So the market goes down and up or up and down. And it is a trading range. Here's a five-minute chart. And this is a one-minute version of what took place on that five-minute chart. It's easier to see the failed breakout if you look at the one-minute chart. So look at this up and down on the one-minute chart. A bull bar and then a bear bar over here. A tail on top over here. It's a big bull trend bar and then a bear reversal bar and then another bear entry bar. Anytime you see a tail, you know on some smaller timeframe chart, a reversal is taking place. Here, a tail below this bar on the one-minute chart, the market goes down and it reverses up. Every tail is a failed breakout attempt and a reversal. I'm going to talk a little bit now about signal bars and entry bars. Whenever you enter a trade, for example, let's say you sell on a stop below the low of that bar. So you get short on this bar. This bar then is the entry bar. And you took this short because this bar signaled you to go short. You have a failed breakout above a double top. You have two legs up, maybe in a trading range, one pulled back two. This bar is telling you maybe you should go short if the next bar trades below the low. So this bar is the signal bar and you enter on that bar. The strongest signal bars are bars that look like this. The market was trending up and it reversed down. So the strongest signal bars are reversal bars. And that's true only if the context is good. If this was a strong bull trend, traders would buy below the low of this bar, betting that the reversal will fail. But it's not a strong bull trend. We went down, we went up, we went down, we went up. Maybe we were going down again. This reversal bar, I think, is a reasonable signal bar because it's supported by the context of the bars to the left. Sometimes you get a signal bar that's also an entry bar. So for example, look at this bull bar. It's breaking above a tight bear channel and it's closing far above the high of the prior bar. Yes, it's signaling that traders should go long. But a lot of traders will look at this close and they'll buy the close. And if they do, then they're entering on this bar. And this bar is also the signal bar. And the opposite is true over here. A lot of traders will see the trend accelerating down. And that is the signal to go short and they'll simply sell the close of this bar. Here we have a sell signal bar. Three pushes up, one, pull back two, pull back three. It's a type of a wedge. It's a fairly tight channel, decent size bear bar. We have very bad follow through on the way up. A bull bar, two bear bars. A bull bar and then five sideways bars. This looks more like a bull leg in what will become a trading range. Even though the channel is tight, it'll make traders more willing to sell below a strong sell signal bar. So they'll place an order to go short just below the low of that bar. And you'll get short on this bar. This then becomes the entry bar. Opposite is true over here. We're starting to trend up in a fairly tight bull channel. Every time it goes down, they buy. Every time it goes down, they buy. Every time it goes down, they buy. And every time it goes up, they sell. So we're starting to channel up. This pullback held above the low of the bull trend. This might be a resumption of the bull trend. And here we have a decent buy signal bar closing on its high. So the traders will buy on a stop just above the high of that bar and get long here. They'll sell one tick below the low of the signal bar. If it's a forex chart, one pip below the low of that signal bar. And they'll buy one tick above the high of this bar. They'll get long on this entry bar. Or if it's a forex chart, they'll buy one pip above the high of this bar and get long on that entry bar. Here, two bear bars, three bear bars, four bear bars closing on its low, closing on the low. Of the four bear bars, all four closed at or below the midpoint and two closed on the low. This is a signal that the market's probably going at least a little bit lower. Some traders will sell that close. So it's both a signal bar and an entry bar. It does not have to be a reversal bar to be a sell signal bar. And the opposite is true here. Five consecutive bull bars. And this one suddenly is getting bigger. A lot of traders believe the first reversal down will be bought. They'll buy the close of this bar or they'll buy the close of the follow through bar. If they buy this close, this is the entry bar. But they bought the close because it's a strong bull trend bar and the fifth bar up. So it's also a buy signal bar. And it's not a reversal bar. It's not reversing anything. The market is trending up strongly. There's no reversal. Signal bars are common. And a lot of them, in fact, most of them are pretty unremarkable. They're not strong reversal bars. Here's a buy signal bar. And not a particularly big bull body. But the bear bodies are not all that strong either. You probably don't need a particularly strong bull reversal to reverse this weak bear trend. Here we have a sell signal bar. It's a reversal bar. But the body is not particularly big relative to the size of the bar. So it's not an especially strong sell signal bar. But it's strong enough given the context. Maybe we're in a trading range. Bull bar doji. Not all that strong. Bull bar, smaller bull bar. Now bear bar. That might be enough to create a reversal. Even though it's not an especially strong sell signal bar. A good trader, an experienced trader, he's going to see setups on every bar. And therefore, every bar on the chart is signaling something. You don't have to trade on every bar on the chart. But every bar is telling you something. And a scalper will take lots of trades. You might buy this close, buy that close, buy this close. Every bar is signaling a buy. And the opposite is true here. Once you start to get three or four consecutive bear bars, traders are going to be entering on every bar selling. Betting that any reversal up is going to be sold. Every bar is signaling lower prices and traders will sell during every bar. They'll sell at the market. They'll sell bear closes. They'll sell bull closes. They'll sell above the high of the prior bar. A lot of websites show signal bars all over the place. Really good sell signal bars. But look at this. There are no good sell signal bars. No really good buy signal bars. This is a typical chart. Really good, strong signal bars are rare. They are the exception. Yet, traders trade every bar. So don't wait for the really great signal bars. If you wait, you'll wait a long time. Because really good looking sell signal bars, big bodies closing on the low, they're rare. And maybe only 1% of the bars on a chart are really strong reversal bars. And in this particular case, that's what we see here. Maybe 100 bars. Only 1 is a strong bear reversal bar. Yet, traders are trading on every bar on the chart. Waiting for that perfect sell or buy signal bar, reversal bar, is I think a waste of time. There are tons of ways to enter the market. And if you know what you're doing, you can pretty much enter on any bar on the chart. And that's the purpose of this course, to try to give you reasons to enter trades. And then also, I talk about how to manage trades as well. I said earlier that just because you have a strong signal bar, and here we have a strong sell signal bar that's also a reversal bar. We're trending up, we're reversing down. You also need good context. You need more than just a sell signal bar. Because a lot of times, sell signal bars will occur in the middle of a trading range, and they're not reversing anything. So you can have a big bear reversal bar, but it's in the middle of the trading range. There's nothing to reverse. There's no bull trend. It's sideways market. We'll go down for a bar, and then we'll go up the next bar. However, look at this chart. We broke above a prior high, and we're reversing down. And we have three pushes up. One, two, three. Other computers will say one, two, three. Other computers will say one, two, three. It's a nested wedge type situation, and you have a failed breakout. We have a strong bull breakout, probably a second leg up. Well, we got the second leg up. And the second leg up is reversing. The context here is good for traders looking to short. Is it perfect? No. A fairly tight bull channel. We can go up for another leg, but we have a nested wedge. We have two legs up in what might be a trading range. We have a failed breakout. It's probably about as good as you're going to get. If you want higher probability, wait until you start to see a series of bear bars, and then sell. You trade off risk for probability. So if you're selling down here, your stop is still up here, which is further away than for the bears are sold here. But that's always the case. Here you're taking a lower probability trade, so you have better risk reward. You have smaller risk. Here you're taking a higher probability trade. The probability at this point after an eight bar, nine bar, ten bar, bear micro channel, probability is first reversal attempt will fail and will go lower. Shorting anywhere down here, higher probability of making money, but worse risk reward. There's less profit remaining in the trade, and your stop is further away, so your risk is greater. If you insist on waiting for perfection, you're never going to trade, and you need to trade to make money. Just look for something that looks reasonably good, and look for something where you think you can structure a trade that has a good trader's equation. Is the reward big enough for the risk? Is the probability high enough to warrant that risk reward? Most traders should be entering mostly with stops. You can sell below the low of this inside bar or below the low of that bear bar. Same thing here. Or you can even start selling bear closes after you start to get four, five, six bear bars without a pullback, and probably going lower. What are the components of a strong sell signal bar? Well, you want an open at or above the close of the prior bar. Here we're opening at maybe slightly above the close of that bar. And you want a close well below the close of that bar. You want the market to close over here, trade up, and then trade down well below the close of the prior bar. And you also want a small or non-existent tail on the bottom. You want the bar to be closing on its low. Ideally, you want the tail on top to be about a third to a half of the height of the bar. Again, these perfect bars are rare, so don't wait for them. But when you see them, they have a higher probability of leading to a profitable trade when the context is good. Another thing that I always like to see is a close that reverses the closes and lows of many other bars. And that's not the case here. This close just reversed the low of this bar. We close below that low. Just reverse one bar. But sometimes you'll get a single bar that reverses the prior 10 or 15 bars. I also want to see good follow through. The follow through bar is the bar immediately after the entry or the sell signal bar. So here we have a sell signal bar. And not particularly good follow through here. But then we've got good follow through here and good follow through here. So sometimes the follow through does not come immediately after the strong bear reversal bar. But as long as it comes soon, the odds are the market will go lower. So here we initially had bad follow through and then bad follow through again here. But then we got over here six bars without a bull body. The follow through is getting stronger and it increases the chances that the market will go at least a little bit lower. What's a good buy signal bar? Well, first of all, you want an open of the bar near or below the close of the prior bar. And this open is just around that close. And you also want pretty good context. And here we have a low. We have another low here or here and then another low here. We're trying to accelerate downward. So it's a parabolic wedge. And then here we went up and we went down, went up. We went down twice. Down, up, down, up. So micro double bottom. That increases the chances that the reversal will work. So the context is pretty good. I also like to see close well above the prior bars close. And the tail on the bottom, ideally you want it to be a third to a half the size of the signal bar. Also, I prefer the bar closing on its high or having only a small tail on top. Once you enter, I want pretty good follow through buying. You buy above this bar. Now we have a micro double bottom. So a slightly higher probability bar. So you get long here. So far, bad follow through. You don't want to see that. However, here we're starting to get three, four, five bull bars. This is good follow through. So the follow through is coming a little bit late. But that's still okay. Again, this is not particularly good follow through here. I mean, it's bad follow through here. But we soon got very good follow through. This increases the chances that this pullback will be followed by higher prices. I now want to talk a little bit about bad signal bars. A weak signal bar can still be good. It can still lead to a good trade. Ideally, you don't want to see too much overlap with the prior bar or bars. Ideally, you'd like to also see a close that reverses several other closes. In other words, if you're looking to buy, you would like the signal bar high to be above certainly the close of the prior bar, but preferably above the close of several prior bars. And I want to see good follow through. It's better if the bar after the signal bar is also a strong signal bar in the direction that you want to take the trade. Preferably not a doji bar, not an inside bar, not a reversal bar. For example, if you want to buy, you don't want to see a doji bar. You don't want to see a bare body. And you prefer not to see an inside bar. You want the market to race up right away. So this is not an ideal signal bar. The bulls did get good follow through. They entered on this bar as the bar went above the high of this bull buy signal bar. And eventually they got some pretty good follow through. The weak setup still led to a profitable trade. Good signal bars are common, but good signal bars with good context is not common. Context means all of the bars to the left. For example, here's a good looking buy signal bar, but it's following four bare bars and a couple of them are pretty big. So good looking buy signal bar, terrible context, bad buy. Another good looking buy signal bar, but still probably part of a bear flag. So good bar, bad trade. Here you've got a good looking sell signal bar, but the context is bad. We just had a reversal up. Good sell signal bar, but bad context, bad trade. And at the low, we got a good reversal up, but look at the buy signal bar. It has a bare body, prominent tail on top, not a good looking buy signal bar. Yet it resulted in a profitable trade. If the context is good, even a bad signal bar, one that looks like this, can lead to a good trade. The better the context, the less important the signal bar. And here the context is pretty good. You've got a nested wedge. We got one push down, two pushes down, three pushes down, and the third push down subdivided into three pushes as well. One, two, three. And you also have a series of consecutive sell climaxes here, here, here, here. And when you have a series of consecutive sell climaxes, usually the market is too far oversold and you're going to get profit-taking on the part of the bears, and you'll get aggressive bulls buying. Nested wedge bottom, trying to reverse up from the third push. One, two, three. Third push. One, two, or two, and then three. Context is very good for buy here. But the signal bar is bad. It's also the sixth consecutive bar down. Five of the bars had bare bodies. Not a great setup for the bulls. But the big picture is good. Over the past five to ten years, computers have come to dominate trading, and now they create most of the volume. And they are much more interested in the context, the bars to the left, support and resistance. And the result is more and more trades now that are profitable come from setups with very bad signal bars. Signal bars have become less important. Because of the computers buying at support, selling at resistance, you often get very abrupt reversals. And a lot of times, you won't have a good buy signal bar at all, but then you'll have a huge bull trend bar. We don't have that here, but that's common. You often get a very good, very violent reversal up without a good buy signal bar. Some traders look at this and say, you know, I want to buy. We have consecutive cell climaxes. We're reversing up from the bottom of the line. We keep reversing up from it. We're probably going higher. But they can't get past this bad buy signal bar. They look at that bear bar and say, I don't want to buy above a bear bar, but I know it's going up. Well, one way to get around that is don't look at a candlestick chart. Just put up a bar chart and you don't see the bear bar. All you see is the context. You see a wedge bear channel with lots of climactic activity. And now you have a second entry buy. First entry above this bar, second entry above this bar. You just place a stop to get long above the high of this bar and you get long right here. And if you're looking at the bar chart, you don't see that it's a bad buy signal bar. All you see is good context and that's all you need. You can either take the trade or if you're looking at a candlestick chart, you can wait for signs of strength and then buy a close or buy a bull flag. We have a reversal up. We have a pullback. You can buy above the high of that doji bar for a second leg up. If you are looking at a chart where the signal bar is not good and you're unable to take this first trade, the stop entry trade, wait for the breakout. And then the probability of higher prices is high and you can buy at the close. You can buy below this bear bar betting the bear reversal will fail or you can buy above the high of this small bull flag betting on a second leg up. Whenever there's any kind of a reversal up, there's always a good buy signal bar on some timeframe and on some kind of chart. For example, if I look at a one minute chart and I see a bar closing on its high and then I see another bar closing on its high and then a third bar closing on its high and I'm expecting a reversal. Well, chances are there's some timeframe that has a perfect looking or very good looking buy signal bar. Here we have six bars closing on their highs. There's some chart, maybe a two minute, three minute, five minutes, six, seven, eight, nine, 10 minute, 13 minutes, 17 minute chart. There's some timeframe where one of these bars will close at the top of that particular timeframe and give you a good buy signal. You don't need to know that. You don't need to find that chart. You know the context is good. And if you want, just look at a one minute chart. And as soon as you see three bars closing on their highs, chances are there is a very good buy signal bar on some chart just placed in order to go long above the high of that third bar. You can check different charts. Here's a 12 minute chart and you get a very good looking buy signal bar. And the context is pretty good. Three pushes down one, two, three, and the third push subdivided into a micro wedge. Again, do not look at all of these charts hoping to find one that has a good looking buy signal bar. You know that just looking at this, there's going to be some chart with a good buy signal bar. And just looking at this, you know the market's going to go up at least a little. Some traders are always searching for perfect buy signal bars. They'll look at tick charts. They'll look at volume charts. They'll look at all kinds of different timeframes. And if they look at tick or volume charts, they try many different bar sizes until they find one that has a very good looking buy signal bar. So for example, if I look at a 1500 tick chart, this is what I get. A pretty good buy signal bar for a wedge bottom. One, two, three. If I trade 7,000 contracts per bar, I also get a good buy signal bar. Why 7,000? Well, I had to experiment. 5,000 didn't work. 2,500 didn't work. If you keep looking, you're going to find some tick chart or some volume chart that has a very good looking buy signal bar whenever you're trying to buy. I had friends years ago who used to use tick charts with Fibonacci numbers. I forgot what the numbers were, but like 367 or 512. They believed that those bars were somehow better than any other bar. And that's nonsense. If you're looking for a good buy signal bar and there's a reversal and you look at enough charts, you're going to find the bar. However, if you spend all that time looking for the perfect buy signal bar, you're probably going to be too late to take the trade. There's always a good buy signal bar on some tick chart or some volume chart. It's a waste of time to search. Beginners do that because they're desperate for reassurance. They're afraid to take the trade. And if they find that good looking buy signal bar, they'll feel like the trade is better. It's not any better. I say that because there's always a good buy signal bar when you're looking to buy. If you look at enough charts, you'll always find one. Finding one does not make the trade any better. The context makes the trade good. I began by talking about trend bars and trading range bars. Every bar on every chart is either a trend bar or a trading range bar. I then moved on to talk about signal bars and entry bars. A signal bar is a warning that you have a potential trade. And an entry bar is the bar when you actually entered the trade. I made the important point about bad signal bars. They've become much more common over the past five to ten years now that computers dominate trading. If the context is good for a trade, take the trade. Don't worry about the signal bar. Also, it's a waste of time to look at a whole bunch of charts trying to find one with a perfect signal bar. If you look at enough charts, you're always going to find a good buy signal bar. So if you're looking to buy, don't waste your time looking for that chart. You know it's there. Just take the trade. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on candles, setups, and signal bars. That's the changing. If you're talking about the 팩man вид desert? That's one evening from the Daily evening. That's the only of the 2700 hours at night after hours ago. Happy devastated. Here are the two Rud