 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first video in the course and in this video I will talk about basic terminology. If you are already familiar with the terms that I use, you can go ahead and skip this video. All traders often use words that can be very unclear and for definitions you can go to my website brookstrainingcourse.com and there is a glossary there. For example, throughout the video course I will be using abbreviations on different slides and these are some of the common ones that you will see. Always in long, always in short, buy, buy low, sell high scalp, breakout, the close of a bar, double bottom, double top. When you hear me talk about a moving average, I'm talking about a 20 bar exponential moving average or an EMA. Then the high of the bar, HFT, high frequency trading. When you see me use HH, I'm talking about a higher high. Low is L. A lower low, a low that is below a prior low is a lower low. When I say moving average, that's the same as the exponential moving average, except rarely I will talk about some simple moving averages. When I do, I'll explain it. Moving average gap bar, when there's a bar where there's a gap between the low or high of the bar and the moving average. Measured move, I talk about this in every video. Major trend reversal, MTR, I talk about that in almost every video. Open of the day, pullback, TB, I refer to that in almost every video. Sell. And then when I talk about corrections, especially after a climax or when I'm expecting a reversal, you'll often see me use the phrase TBTL, 10 bars, two legs, which is a common occurrence when the market is trying to correct. Trading range, TR. And when the trading range is particularly tight, I call it a tight trading range, TTR. Every market at all times is either in a trend or in a trading range. A bull trend typically begins with the bull breakout, which is a big bull trend bar, a white bar. Bare bars are black bars. And here the bar opens at this point at the bottom of the white box. And that is the close of the white box. After the breakout, which can last many bars here, it lasted a couple of bars. There is a pullback where a low of a bar goes below the low of the prior bar. And that usually results in a transition from the breakout phase of a trend, which is very strong, into a channel phase of the trend. And a channel is a weaker trend, but it's still a bull trend. We're still going up. We have highs that are above prior highs. We have higher highs and we have higher lows. And that is the definition of a trend. Eventually, a channel typically evolves into a trading range. So I view a bull channel as a bear flag because most of the time you get a bear breakout and a transition into a trading range. And once the market's in a trading range, it then is in breakout mode, which means traders are anticipating a breakout. And here we have a bull trend and a trading range. The breakout can be to the upside, in which case you're getting a resumption of the prior bull trend. Or it could be to the downside and you can get a reversal of the bull trend. You'll often hear traders talk about support and resistance. Support is some price below the current price where a sell off is likely to pause or reverse. So even though you don't see anything right here that is causing the market to go up, the market believes this price is too low. So when it gets down here, the market goes up. Here we're a little bit lower, but the same general area. There's support down here. Every sell off is being bought. The resistance is the opposite. It's a price above the current price and a rally to that level is likely to stall or reverse. On the chart, you don't see a line drawn across the resistance level, but you notice the price action. The market goes up and it turns down. It goes up to that same general price area, turns down. It goes a little bit higher and twice tries to go higher and it turns down. Traders see this price level as resistance and they expect that if the market gets back up there again, it'll do what it did the prior times. Not always, but most of the time. A breakout is simply a move beyond support or resistance. A bear breakout is a move below support. Here we have a bull channel. Higher lows, higher highs. And then we have a break below the line. This is a big bear trend bar and it is a breakout. It's a move below support. There's other support down here. And the market broke through support here. Here it did not. It kept holding support, holding support. Eventually it broke out. And now it's testing the next lower support level, which is a prior low. And we don't know yet if it will continue down and break below that support or bounce at that support. When the market was at this price level earlier, it rallied. Maybe it will do that again now that it's at that same price level. And it did. The support held and a strong bear breakout led to a bounce instead of a bear trend. Every bear trend bar is a breakout. Every bull trend bar is a breakout. It's a bull breakout. We're reversing up. You can also say that we're breaking out, breaking out of a very steep two-bar bear trend. And we're stalling here, a smaller bar with a tail on top, at a price level where the market stalled repeatedly earlier. So we're stalling at resistance. We don't know yet if the market will reverse down from resistance or if it will break out. In this particular case, we broke far above the resistance level and we had follow-through buying. So this is a successful bull breakout after a failed bear breakout. So this is a candle chart. This type of chart is a candle chart. I sometimes refer to each candle as a bar instead of a candle. And you'll see on a lot of the bars, there's a black line on top. Sometimes there's a black line on the bottom. And white bars can have black lines on the bottom or on top. Black bars can have black lines on the bottom or on top. They can have them on top and bottom. Here's a black bar with a line on top and bottom. A white bar with a line on top or bottom. And I usually refer to those black lines as tails. Other people refer to them as wicks or shadows. It doesn't matter. I just like the word tail. A bar where there is either a big white box or a big black box is a trend bar. It occurs more commonly in trends. And I call it a trend bar because it's a one bar trend. So the market is trending up for this one bar. Open near as low. Close near as high. In general, the strongest trend bars have relatively small tails. Sometimes they have big tails like that, but it's still a bull trend bar. It's mostly a bull trend bar. And if the tails are more prominent relative to the size of the bodies, I tend to say that's not a trend bar. It's more of a trading range bar. And I refer to trading range bars as doji's. Trading range bars in general have smaller bodies and more prominent tails. I view them as a one bar trading range. And on some smaller timeframe chart, they are one bar trading ranges. A bull trend bar is a one bar bull trend. And on a smaller timeframe chart, it's a pretty strong bull trend. And a trading range bar or a doji is a trading range on a smaller timeframe chart. I make decisions on what I'm going to do with my trading based upon technical analysis. A lot of institutions prefer fundamental analysis. I'm looking at charts that show prices and the price action is how the price moves. How is the price acting? How is it going up, going down, going sideways? How much momentum? How strong are the moves up and down? Fundamental analysis, it's mostly used by institutions and they are looking at economic information and they mostly ignore charts, but not entirely. A lot of fundamental traders will say, ah, the fundamental information supports higher prices. And anytime the market sells off, if it pulls back to some support level, like a moving average or a prior low, they'll look to buy more. In their mind, they're making the decision based upon fundamental information, betting that the Bay reversal will fail. So a lot of fundamental traders also look at charts. Sometimes you'll hear the expression, an ABC pullback. For example, let's say an ABC pullback in a bull trend. It's two legs sideways to down. It doesn't always have to be down. It can simply be sideways. And in a bull trend, I refer to those as a high two buy setup or a high two bull flag. And it's an opportunity for traders to buy, to get long. So for example, we have a little bull trend. Bull trend started here. We have a new bull leg here. We pulled back. We tried to resume up. It failed. Maybe a second attempt will be successful. This is a high one buy setup. Did not work. And this bar is a high two buy setup. And it did work. Buying above its high led to a profitable trade. Some traders would also call that an ABC pullback. So you have a bull trend and then ABC. A three legged correction. Two legs down, one leg up. A leg down, B leg up, C leg down, and then bull trend resumption. And traders would buy using a stop order above the high of the bar. Here's another example. Bull breakout. A pullback. Did not lead to much of a trend. To me, this is a high one bull flag. I would refer to this as a high two bull flag. If this breakout were bigger, I would restart the count. For example, here, we have a pretty big bull breakout. This correction has to do with this bar, not with this prior trend. So I'm starting the process over again. New breakout, new pullback. This breakout is not big enough for me to start the process over again. You could call it a high one. You could say this is a breakout and a pullback. Or you could say, well, maybe the market corrected down and maybe this is still part of the correction. And this is part of the correction. This is an ABC where A went above the top of the bull breakout, but it's still part of the corrective process. And that's why I say it can be sideways to down, not necessarily down. This one was a little bit down, mostly sideways, but this one clearly is sideways. Here's another bull breakout. I'm looking for pullbacks. Okay. This is an inside bar, but it has a bare body. On a small timeframe, that's a small pullback. On this chart, it's technically not a pullback because the low of this bar did not go below the low of that bar. But it's an inside bar. It's a pause. For me, that's a high one bull flag and bulls will buy just a little bit down. It's just above its high looking for resumption up. In general, they'll put a stop down here because sometimes the market will go sideways and then slightly lower. But the trade is still valid. For me, this is a bull trend and a pullback, a high one buy setup. Is this enough of a breakout for me to restart the count and call this another high one? You can. I would say that it's not big enough. And I would say this is all part of the same correction. To me, this would be a high one, a first attempt up, did not get very far. And this would be a high two buy setup. And traders would buy above the high of that bar or above the high of this bar. Any time the market forms a double bottom bull flag, it's a high two buy setup. In a bear trend, traders are looking for the exact opposite. Here's a bear trend. And anytime there is a pullback or a pause, traders look at it as an opportunity to go short. The high of this bar did not go above the high of this bar. So it's technically not a pullback on this timeframe, but it probably is a pullback on a smaller timeframe. In any case, it's a pause and traders will place a stop order to go short just below the low of this bar. Betting that if it does go below that bar, the trend will resume down. Here, it simply went sideways. And here's a second attempt to go down. For me, this is a low one short. And then we have a double top bear flag. That's a low two short. So you either sell there or you sell below this bar here. Low one bear flag, low two bear flag. Same thing here. As the market's going up after each bar, traders place a stop order to go short just below the low of the bar. They place a stop order when this bar closes to sell right below the low of the bar. They get filled here. It's still going up. It's still correcting, but it's still most likely a minor reversal and a bear flag. Traders who did not sell here, they might instead place a order to sell below this bar. Does not get filled. They then place an order to sell below this bar. It does get filled. So a second entry short in a rally in a bear trend. It's a low two short, a low two bear flag, an ABC bear flag. There are always other ways to label things. Some traders instead will look at this as a larger low one, a sideways move low one. And then this is part of that correcting process. And then a low two where the second leg also subdivided. They'll look at this as sideways to a low one and then up to a low two. So they'll view this as a larger low two bear flag or a larger double top bear flag. First top, second top. It doesn't matter what you call it. You're looking for ways to enter the trend. And when you see these bear flags, look to sell. This is a fairly tight bear channel. The first reversal is probably minor. A minor reversal is going to be usually a bear leg in a trading range or a bear flag. We got a bear trend. We're trying to reverse probably a minor reversal. I call it a pullback. Whenever I see a reversal attempt and I think it will not get very far and the trend will resume, I call it a pullback. That last slide I showed a minor reversal. And look at this reversal. Bear trend and a very strong bull breakout. Follow through bar. Another follow through bar. So at this point we're in a bull trend. Here this is a major reversal, not just a bear flag. Here, minor reversal, bear flag. Here, minor reversal, bear flag. Minor reversal, bear flag. But look at the size of this breakout. Far above the bear channel. This is a major trend reversal, which means the bear trend is becoming a bull trend. Now look at this. We have a bull trend here and then a bear breakout to a broader bull channel. But you can look at this and say bull trend, pretty strong bear breakout. If we go above that high or test that high, maybe we'll get a trend reversal into a bear trend. And that's what we have. We have a bull trend and then a bear trend. If a bull trend goes to a bear trend, it's a major reversal. If a bull trend just goes sideways and the bull trend resumes, it's a minor reversal. Even this is a minor reversal because the bull trend resumed. So minor reversal, the trend resumes instead of reversing. Sometimes you'll see a bar like this. Its low is below the low of the prior bar. Its high is above the high of the prior bar. That is an outside bar. It does not have to be below. I call it an outside bar if the high is exactly at the high of the prior bar. And the low goes below the low of the prior bar. For example, over here. This bar did not go above that high. The two highs are at the same price. Yet its low went below. I would still call that an outside down bar, an outside bar. And an inside bar is a bar where its high and low are within the range of the prior bar. This bar, the low is above that low. The high is below that high. So this black bar is an inside bar. And look at the next bar. This white bull body, it's inside of the black bar. Its highest below that high. And its low is above that low. Same here. Another inside bar. This bar is inside that bar. This bar is inside that bar. A small inside bar here. Here's an inside bar. The high is the same as that high. But the low is above that low. So I would still refer to that as an inside bar. That's why I say, for an outside bar, the high is at or above the high of the prior bar. And the low is at or below the low of the prior bar. And an inside bar, the high is at or below the high of the prior bar. And the low is at or above the low of the prior bar. And this is actually an outside bar as well. Its low was below the low of that bar. Its high was above the high of this bar. Here's the Australian dollar versus the US dollar. A five minute chart, Forex chart. I distinguish trades into swing trades and scalps. A scalp means that I'm trying to take a quick profit. I usually exit within five bars and sometimes just one bar. A swing trade means I'm planning to hold onto my position as long as the trend is going in my direction. Let's look at this chart and let's talk about buying here. If I buy above the high of this bar, I get filled right here just above that high. And let's say I get out four or five bars later below the spare bar. Right where this red box is right below the low of that bar. To me, that's a scalp. I did not allow any pullbacks. I get out within, you know, one, two, three, four, five bars and did not matter to me that the trend continued. If I buy here and get out a few bars later and did not allow pullbacks, that's a scalp. On the other hand, what happens if I exit up here or up here? If I'm exiting up here at the end of the session, to me, that's a swing trade. So I buy here. I don't worry about the pullback here or here or here or here or here. None of these look like major reversals. I'm willing to continue to hold despite all of the pullbacks. And then I look to exit at the end of the session. If you're holding through pullbacks and for a lot of bars, that is a swing trade. That last chart was a five minute chart. And here is a daily chart. There are other terms to use when talking about scalping and swing trading on higher timeframe charts, daily or weekly charts. So for example, let's say a bull trader bought here and he get out here. He's a scalper. You might call him a fast money trader or simply a trader. And if you get out here and this was a monthly chart, people would call him an investor. If it was a weekly chart, they might call him an investor. To me, I would call him a swing trader, even on this chart. But in general, if you're taking quick profits on a daily chart, traders will call you a trader or a fast money trader or a scalper. But usually they use the term trader. And if a person is holding for a long time, 20, 30, 40 bars, you start to get into the realm of being an investor, especially if it's a weekly or monthly chart. Some swing traders will hold far beyond a typical swing, which might be 10, 20 or 30 bars. They may hold indefinitely, sometimes for years or months. And that would be an investor. People would use the term investor instead of swing trader for that kind of a person. If you look at a chart, you see the market going up and down, up and down, up and down. And the smallest move up or down on a chart is a tick. So if it goes up one move, it's called a tick. If it goes up three or four, it's called three or four ticks. If you're looking at a forex chart, people tend to use the term pip instead of a tick, but it's the same thing. And nowadays pips are also subdivided into tenths or even hundredths. But I just refer to pips and I don't worry about the tiny small divisions. A point is a group of ticks or pips. So for example, one point on the E-mini chart is four ticks. A corresponding move on the spider SPY ETF chart is 10 ticks. You'll sometimes hear traders talk about the lot size. I traded five lots, which means you traded five contracts or five shares or five units or five something. And a handle is a big round number. So if the spider is trading at 202.50, you would say it has a 202 handle on it. When I talk about moving averages, I'm usually talking about a 20 bar exponential moving average. Whether it's a five minute chart or a month chart, it doesn't matter. If you hear me say moving average and I don't qualify it, I'm talking about a 20 bar exponential moving average. Some people refer to it as an EMA exponential moving average. I simply call it a moving average. This moving average is a 20 bar exponential moving average. Computers, you cannot get around the reality that they control all major markets. Most trading nowadays is automated. That means the orders are placed by computers and software programs, which are called algorithms, are making decisions about when to buy, when to sell, when to add on to positions, when to slightly reduce positions. Here's an example of a flow chart of an algorithm. You'll sometimes hear me talk about an institution. Bank of America, CalPERS, the pension fund for state employees in California. Fidelity, investments, those are all institutions. Goldman Sachs, an institution could be a bank. It could be a hedge fund, a high frequency trading firm, pension fund like CalPERS, mutual funds like Fidelity. Any large entity is an institution, and that includes large individual traders. So, for example, the smallest position size in the E-mini is one contract. If a trader is trading 100 contracts or 200 contracts or more, I would consider them to be as significant as an institution, even if they're trading for their own account. You'll often hear me talk about setups. And it's a chart pattern. It's something on the chart. And it makes me believe that there will be a profitable trade. Sometimes the setup is one bar. Sometimes it's three or four bars. Sometimes it's 20 or 30 bars. So, for example, we have a bull trend, and it's pulling back for a few bars. And as it's pulling back, traders are placing buy stops one tick above the high of the prior bar. It did not get filled. A new bar closes. They place a buy stop one tick or one pip above the high of that bar. And in this case, the trader did get filled. This is the bar when they enter their trade. So it's the entry bar. And this is the bar that signaled the entry. When they saw this bar, they thought, huh, if it goes above the high of this bar, I want to get long. This is the signal bar, and traders get in on the entry bar. The signal bar is the reason to take the trade. It's the signal to look to enter. So here's the signal bar. We're with the trend. We're trading in the direction of the trend. Buying above this bar is buying with trend. Counter trend means doing the opposite. For example, we have a bull trend, and if I'm selling below that bar right here, it's a counter trend trade. So I'm trading in the direction opposite to the trend. Context, you'll often hear me talk about context. Is it a buy setup or a sell setup? I'm always interested in the context. And context means all the bars to the left. If I see this bar, I want to know what took place before it. Do I want to buy here? Maybe it's better to sell here. I want to know what the bars to the left look like. And those bars to the left provide the context. So for example, if there's a strong bear trend, do I really want to be buying here? No. It's a bull reversal bar. It's a buy signal, but it's a buy signal that I would not take. If anything, I'm looking to sell. When there's a very tight bear channel like this, I don't care if there's a good bull reversal bar and a good follow-through bar. It's more likely the reversal will fail and this bull reversal will end up as a bear flag. If this is a low one sell signal bar, traders will sell just below its low. Expecting the reversal to fail, become a bear flag, and for the bear trend to resume. I often talk about always in. That is the direction of the current trade. For example, here I would say the market's always in long. So if I had to be in the market this instant, would I rather be long or short? If I had to be always in the market at this point, I would be long because odds are the market's going higher. If I had to be always in the market and it's right at this instant, I want to be short. The market's always in short here and somewhere in here, it became always in long. Traders thought it was better to be long, easier to make money being long than short. Traders thought it was better to be short. I pay attention to context. The context here is that we're in a bear trend. We're getting lower highs and lower lows. We're starting to get a lot of two-sided trading. Tails below bars, some bull bars, smaller bars, sideways bars. It's still always in short, but it looks like it's evolving into a trading range, which means that it may soon reverse into always in long. Three big bear bars, a bear channel with about eight or ten bars, but tail on the bottom of the bar. That's weakening, a weakening trend. Another big bear breakout, but a big tail below. And the close of this bar, the bottom of that black box, is above the breakout point. There are problems with this bear trend. Another breakout, a close just around the breakout point instead of far below. Goals are buying prior lows and they're making money. And that usually means that a bear channel is in the process of evolving into a trading range. And once it's in a trading range, traders will start to look for trend reversals. So we have a fairly tight bear channel. And then we have a bull trend bar breaking above the high of the channel, breaking above the top of the channel. Trend lines are rarely perfect. You can see I'm using this high and then this series of highs. The market looks like it's turning down every time it hits an imaginary line at that point. I would extend the line from here all the way here. I could draw it from this high across that high, or I could simply use a small trend line from here to here. In any case, we're getting a bull breakout of a bear channel. And that means traders will start looking for possible trend reversals. So we have a low here. We reversed up. We have a lower low. We reversed up. And here, the bears are trying to resume back down, but this is forming a higher low. This setup, this buy setup here is called a higher low major trend reversal. Higher low with the potential of reversing into a major trend. It's also a head and shoulders bottom. This would be the left shoulder. This is the head. And this would be the right shoulder. So it's a reversal setup. Not a high probability buy at this point. But once you start to get three or four bars with big bull bodies closing on their highs, the bars getting bigger. At some point, the market becomes always in long for everybody, which means that traders can buy for any reason, expecting that the market will be higher as more bars become visible. Another breakout. We have a small breakout here. And now we have three bull bars. And traders might buy this far as it moves above that high, the neckline of the head and shoulders bottom. They may simply buy the close, arguing that it's the third bull close. Very little overlap between the bars. And the bodies are getting bigger. And it's following a higher low major trend reversal. Over here, the tails are starting to become prominent. The bodies are getting small. Each doji is a one bar trading range. And here it's forming a pullback. A pullback means that when I refer to an attempt at a reversal as a pullback instead of a trading range, that means I believe the trend will resume instead of reverse. Each one of these bars is a one bar trading range, a doji bar. And together they form a slightly bigger trading range. Somewhere in here, traders concluded that the market became always in long. It was always in short all the way down here. This is Al Brooks and thank you for watching this video in the Brooks Trading Course. This video was on terminology. Click the poll on our navigation. As well as the first rule is pretty large, you may enter the Ethereum box. And then you saw the links that are on the menu. Idiotist was a Rex. I amAFP and one and a few clicks on the newύ点 BB. Thebape designs have an average review of 30 min There are no semprel soprattutto. As right there are noix Sundays. As I am maker to share in the two places and retailers. And if that's the idea of which we have corresponded to a spread In love andaciones, these times are open, I'mوق Ave will be lifted from the curiosity. Something else isgr5 or two players in the new arms. Of course, we have been Czyli Rico. And if there was actuallyивал that because the trapsка of design tracks