 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos on pullbacks and bar counting. I'm first going to be talking about endless pullbacks, pullbacks that just continue to grow until they become an opposite trend. I'm going to then move on and talk about pullbacks on higher and smaller timeframes. And then I'll talk about the importance of counter trend traders exiting when there's a high two or a low two. Here's an example of a strong bull breakout and it's starting to pull back. Different ways to count it. One, two, three. You can say this is one, two, three, and then four. But anyway, it's a fairly tight bear channel. And that is a warning that the first reversal up probably will be minor. And a very tight bear channel like this lasting 20 bars like this beginning over here. You have to be thinking that there's at least a 40% chance of a bear breakout in a bear trend. In general, a bear trend inside of a bigger bull trend is a bull flag. It begins as a pullback. And as it grows, it becomes more of a trading range here, a trading range that's sloped down. And once it reaches 20 bars or more, I call it an endless pullback, especially when the channel is tight like this. And when that happens, the probability of trend resumption up drops to 50%. And the probability of trend reversal down increases to 50%. So around here, 50% chance the bears will get a bear breakout and a trend down. Again, you can call it a high three, high one, high two, high three, high four, one, two, three, four. Doesn't matter. It's a wedge bull flag, three pushes down, so it's a wedge bull flag. But the channel is very tight and the pullbacks are small. Just one bar, one bar, one or two bars, one bar. And that reduces the probability of strong resumption up. And it increases the probability that any bull breakout will be minor and lead to a continuation of the developing trading range instead of a resumption of the bull trend. In general, whenever you have a bull flag, only a 40% chance of a bear breakout. But once the bull flag, the bear channel, reaches 20 or more bars, and especially if it's in a tight channel like this, probability is more like 50-50. The key is to wait to see if you do get a bear breakout bar and a follow-through bar. And here we have a bear breakout bar. Tail on the bottom, not especially big. But here we have a very big bear breakout bar, despite the tail on the bottom. And then there's a follow-through breakout bar. So the odds are we'll get at least a second leg down and at least a measured move down. It's probably a measuring gap. But this upper range is so small, we've already gone more than a measured move down. But the key point is a big bear breakout with follow-through below a bull flag. We're probably going to get at least a couple legs sideways to down. Here's the opposite situation. You have a series of cell climaxes here, here, here, a little bit here. And then we're pulling back. But the pullback is in a very tight, bold channel. We tried to resume down here. We tried to break to the upside here. Tried to reverse down here. The entire thing is a pullback. And it's lasting a long time. And the more bars that get added to a pullback, the lower the probability for trend resumption down is, and the higher the probability for trend reversal up is. Once the pullback has 20 or more bars in a very tight channel like this, 50-50 chance you're going to get a bull breakout of the bear flag. I call it an endless pullback once it hits 20 bars. So you've got to be ready for that bull breakout. And here, we have a bull breakout and a follow-through bar. Probably we'll get at least a second leg up. Is this the second leg? I don't know. Is this the second leg? This? This? I don't know. But the odds are we're going to get at least a second leg up. It's possible this is the first leg. And then pause. And then we get a second leg up later. Here, we have a 20 bar tight trading range after a bull breakout. 20 bar tight trading range makes the market back to neutral. So at this point, 50% chance we'll get resumption up. 50% chance we'll get reversal down. 24 bars, you can do different kinds of counts. High one, high two, high three, high four. Bull breakout didn't go very far. And then high one, high two. Doesn't matter. 20 or more bars in a very tight channel like this, a tight trading range like this. The probability for the bulls has dropped. And now it's the same as for the bears. Bear breakout, bear follow through. Probably at least one more leg down. Here we go. Three more legs down. I want to now talk about higher and lower timeframes. When you get pullbacks. And when you're trying to do some bar counting. Here, this is a five minute chart. And it's a trading range lasting a lot of bars. Maybe a hundred or more bars. And you can do different kinds of bar counting. Leg one, pullback leg two. So high two. And then we have another high one, high two. So it's a complex high one, pullback high two. And a higher timeframe chart is just leg one, pullback leg two. On the higher timeframe chart, it's just a big high two bull flag. So for example, 60 minute version of the same chart. This becomes a high one. Here's a high one. And the second leg down is a high two. This is a 60 minute chart of that. On the five minute chart, it's a very complex pullback. On the 60 minute chart, it's fairly simple. And some traders, when they see pullbacks like this, that just seem to go on forever. And they look very complex. And they're very difficult to understand what's going on. Sometimes it's helpful to look at a higher timeframe chart. And what is going on becomes a lot clearer. Here, five minute chart, 100 bar trading range, 100 bar trading range. Move up to a 15 minute chart, maybe a 60 minute chart. This is a 60 minute chart. And it becomes simpler. Here we go. A very tight trading range, a low one sell. Did not work. And we have a low two sell. It did work. There's a low one short, but it's a low one short. You can also think about lower timeframes as well. Here we have a five minute chart and a low one sell. It worked. But on a smaller timeframe chart, it's probably a complex pullback. You can see this tail down here. So we went up on this bar. And then on this bar, the doji bar, we went down and up. Then we have another doji bar here. So probably down and up there as well. So whenever you see a low one short on one timeframe here or here, chances are it's going to be a complex pullback on the lower timeframe. So a one minute version of this, in this case, looked like this. If you're looking at the five minute chart and you see a low one pullback, it's probably more complex on a lower timeframe. You can see that five minute low one bear flag is a wedge bear flag on a smaller timeframe chart. Most traders would pop up the smaller timeframe chart and look to sell a bear flag in a bear trend. However, most traders should just trade the chart in front of them. If they're five minute traders, just take the short on the five minute chart. Again, we have a series of low one shorts on a five minute chart, and they can be more complex on a one minute chart. Most traders should just simply trade the five minute chart. But if you wanted to, you could always put up a one minute chart. Low one, low two. Micro double top, low two. Five minute chart. Five minute chart. Five minute chart. Is this a high one? And then is this a high two? Or is this whole thing basically a bigger high one? High one, buy. I think you can buy above that bar. It did not trigger on this bar. It did trigger on this bar. You can still place your buy stop to buy above the high of that bar even after this big bear bar. In this case, you would get long either as this big bull reversal bar went above that bar, or instead you could wait and then place a buy stop above this big outside up bar. You can call it a wedge bull flag. One, two, three. You can call it a double bottom bull flag. Micro double bottom. One, two. You can call it a 50% pullback of the strong bull trend. And if you want, you can call it two legs down. One, pull back two. The point is not arguing. Is this a high one buy? Is this a high one buy because it went above that bar? Or is it two legs down? One, pull back two. It doesn't matter what you call it. It's a pullback and we're still always in long and traders are looking to buy a resumption up. Some computers will see it as a high one, others as a high two. And I never worry about the name. I just worry about what's going on and I want to buy. It's a bull trend. I want to buy. You'll sometimes hear me say that if we have a bull trend and I'm trying to scalp a short, like sell a low one or something or sell a bad high one. If there's a strong bull trend, you have to assume that reversal attempts will fail. Well, let's say a trader looks at this and says, huh, big tail, buy climax. Maybe there's a trading range here and it's at the top of a trading range. They'll say bad bull flag. I'm going to sell with a limit order at the high of this bar. And if they're still short here, now we have a high two. High one, high two with a bull body. You got to get out whenever you have a reasonably strong bull trend. And if you're shorting, you might let the market go once against you, but the second time against you, you cannot do it. You got to get out on the high two buy setup. And that's one of the reasons why high two buy setups and bull trends are so good because the bears who are shorting will let the market go against them one time, but they will not let the market go against them a second time. So the bears will buy back their shorts when the high two triggers. And that's why bulls will buy that high two because they know the bears will give up. Some bears might sell this, but if they do, they're not going to let the market resume up a second time. They're going to get out. And the bulls know that. And the bulls love high twos for that reason. The high two is the second attempt to resume the bull trend. And it therefore has a higher probability of success. And if traders are short, they will exit their shorts if the high two triggers, especially if the buy signal bar for the high two has a bull body. And if traders are flat, it's a great opportunity to get long. You have a high two buy setup with a bull body. So bulls will buy because it's a high two and a bull trend. Now, why is it such a reliable buy? Because both bulls and bears are buying. Bears are buying back their shorts and giving up. And bulls are buying because they believe the bull trend is resuming. So there's nobody willing to sell at this price. And the market has to go higher to find sellers. The growth of a bull price. It makes it a great buy setup in a bull trend. The opposite is true in a bear trend. Some bulls will look at this as consecutive sell climaxes. And maybe the buy above here, taking a chance that they'll get a scalp up. So first leg up. and then the bears tried to resume down. It never triggered a low one. We did not go below the low of the prior bar. However, we tried to go up again a second time. We can call this a low one. You can call it a low two. To me, it's a micro double top. We have a strong bull reversal and then a bear bar. And then the bulls tried to reverse up a second time. We have a second bull bar. And if I am buying up here, I now have a micro double top 50% pullback and a bear trend. The key point is the bulls tried to go up once. They tried to go up a second time. And if the market goes down, I want to get up. You can call it a low one. You can call it a low two. It's an implied low two. We went up and then a bear bar. And then we went up again. I usually call this a low two. And I'm going to get out of any longs below that bar, even though it has a bull body. It's a micro double top 50% pullback and a pretty strong trend. You can also call it a wedge. Three pushes up. One, we went up and down, up and down, and then up and down. So it's also a wedge. Wedge bear flag. Bulls will get out and bears will short. High probability that you're going to get at least some resumption down. Because there's nobody left willing to buy. The bulls tried twice and they failed twice. That makes a low two, a high probability sell. We have a bull trend and a wedge top. One, two, three. It triggered either below that bull bar or below this bear bar. However, it's also arguably a high two buy. With a good bull bar. At this point, a lot of the bears who sold this as a wedge will get out. Other bears will say, yeah, bull trend, pullback. Looks like we're developing a trading range. So some bears might use a wide stop and scale in high. Most bears will say, I don't know. That's a fairly tight channel. We have a fairly tight channel with a tight channel wedge. Really not a very good sell. Too much risk of trend resumption up. I have to get out above a bull bar. You can call it a micro double bottom and a high two. But I think you have to get out when the channel is that tight. Because too much risk that the trend will continue up. Bulls know that. They know the bears took a bad short. Selling a wedge top but a very tight bull channel. Probably minor reversal and the best the bears get is the trading range. So the bulls will buy that. Betting on trend resumption up. Here we have a bull trend. And we have a micro double top here. We have bear bars. Several bear bars. Some bears will take this sell. Especially if this is within a trading range. We don't see the bars to the left. But if this is a bull leg in a trading range, bears might be willing to sell below this bear bar. However, they have to be careful because for the bulls, it's a high one, pullback high two, maybe a wedge. One down, up. One down, up. One down. So it could be a wedge bull flag. Might get a gap here between this low and that high. The bears who sell here are going to be very quick to get out if this starts to resume up. They'll buy back above this high two buy, even though it has a bear body. We have a gap and it's a high two buy or a wedge bull flag. Will they buy above this bar? I don't know. They may be willing to hold above this bar. But if we go sideways and get a bull bar and then a high two or a high three bull flag, they will get out. And that's what happened here. We had a bull reversal bar. Again, high one here and then a second leg down, high two here. Second attempt by the bulls to resume up. If a bear did sell below this bar, they get filled over here. They would either buy above this bear bar. They certainly would have to buy above this bull bar, even though it closed the gap above that high. To me, it's two legs down and a bull bar and a bull trend, about a 50% pullback of the prior leg up. Most bears will give up. In this video, I talked about endless pullbacks. Pullbacks in tight channels lasting 20 or more bars. They have a 50% chance of leading to a trend reversal. I also talked about pullbacks on higher and lower timeframes. If you have a pullback on a five-minute chart that seems to last forever, 50 bars, 100 bars, and it's hard to read the count, sometimes it's easier simply to look at a higher timeframe chart, like a 60-minute chart, and things can be much more clear. Also, if you look at a low one, short, and a five-minute chart, you can infer a low two or a wedge bear flag on a small timeframe chart, like a one-minute chart. And then finally, I talked about the importance of countertrend traders exiting if a high two triggers in a bull trend or a low two triggers in a bear trend. And that's why a high two is such a good buy setup in a bull trend and a low two is such a good sell setup in a bear trend. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the end of the third video on pullbacks and bar counting. . . . . . .