 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on double tops and bottoms. I use a very broad definition of a double top and a double bottom. I'll then move on to talk about why double tops and double bottoms work. And next I'll talk about double top gold flags and double bottom bear flags. I'm moving through the list of reversal patterns. A double top or a double bottom can be either a flag, a continuation pattern, or a reversal. They're present on every chart, and many of them are present on every chart, and there are often two or three ways to draw the lines. Again, they can be a pullback on a trend, or they can be a reversal leading to an opposite trend. Many of them are too small to trade profitably on the chart in front of you. However, if you were to trade down to a smaller timeframe chart, they would be big enough to trade. Many are good for swings. Many are only good for scalp trades. I think it's very important to be flexible in how you define a double top and a double bottom. You have to be that way because the computers are, and they control the market. The concept is if there's a rally and then a pullback and then another rally, it's testing the high of the first rally. Will the rally continue or will it reverse? And the opposite is true at a bottom. If there's a sell-off and then a pullback and then the bear trend resumes, will the bear trend continue past the prior low or will it reverse? It's testing the prior low. For example, we reverse down here. We tried to get up there again, and we reverse down again, but at a lower price. This is a double top. This tested that high and could not even get close to it. We pull back and we went up again. And this time we went to a new high. We twice tried to go above it here, pull back here, and then even a third time, and we failed. This high then became a double top test of this high, and it led to a reversal. It's a slight higher high double top. Strong bear breakout. A reversal attempt. The bear trend resuming, yet it reversed up again from around the same price. There are more buyers than sellers at this price. This is a double bottom. It's a higher low double bottom, but it's a double bottom. Pull trend, pull back, break to a new high. This is testing that high. It's also testing this high. So it's a double top with this for some computers. A double top with that for other computers. It's also a micro double top with this. It went up, it reversed. It went up again, reversed again. This is testing that low and that low. So it's a double bottom with this low. Other computers would say it's a double bottom with that low. Micro double top. We went up and down and then up again. You might not be able to see the small blue line on top of that red line. Micro double bottom. We went down, reversed up. Sold off to that same price again, and again found buyers and others. And reversed up again. Micro double bottom. Double bottom. Two pushes down. One pull back, two. Big sell off. And now it's a double bottom with that low. Micro double top. We went up and down and then up again. You might not be able to see the small blue line on top of that red line. Micro double bottom. We went down, reversed up. Sold off to that same price again, and again found buyers and reversed up again. Micro double bottom. Bull flag. Two pushes down. One pull back, two. sell-off. We went back up to that price again over here and reversed down again. This is a double top with this and within it there's a micro double top. On this bar the market went up and down, next bar went up and the third bar went down. Micro double top increases the chances of a reversal. Here's a small double top here, here's a micro double top here. Up and down, up and then down. Micro double bottom, the market went down and then on this bar and went up and down again and went a little bit lower on this bar so it went down, up and down and then reversed up. It became a bear flag but it's still a micro double bottom after the breakout below these lows. Micro double top, the market went up and down and then went up on this bar and a little bit more on that bar and reversed down. Bear flag, testing this breakout point. Top of the bear flag, we sold off strongly. We're back up at that price again. Will we sell off again? Probably not after eight bull bars. However, it was an attempt by the bears to get a double top. It became a bull flag, small bull flag. This next attempt to reverse down around that high succeeded. So this is a double top. The market sold off down to this area. It collapsed. Yet found buyers, tried to sell off again, found buyers. Went up and down here, tried to sell off again and found buyers. This is a double bottom. A higher low double bottom. Micro double bottom. The market went up for three bars, tried to resume down and a bear flag. Instead, the bulls bought it and went up again. And down again, twice trying to resume the bear trend and the bulls bought it again. A micro double bottom led to a breakout. This high, these lows measured move up, up to here. Double bottom bull flag. The market rallied here. The bears wanted a double top. It sold off briefly to form a tail on the bottom of that bar. It tried to form a micro double top here and sell off again from a bigger double top here. The bulls bought it again. A small double bottom bull flag. A bull breakout above that high. And the bears tried to reverse. And the bulls bought it again around this price. Another double bottom bull flag. The market went up and reversed down strongly here. It tried to resume up. It did pretty well. But at the same price, slightly above maybe, it reversed down again. A micro double top and a double top with that high. And this is a double top with this high. Different computers view the test differently. Micro double bottom and a higher low major trend reversal. Bear trend. Bull breakout. Two legs down. We got a higher low reversal. And it came with a micro double bottom here and another one here. We had a double top bear flag here. The market went up. Tried to resume down. Went up again. Tried to resume down. This low went below that low. So it triggered the low too short. Yet, there were buyers below that bear flag and the market reversed up. A double bottom higher low. Or you could simply call it a higher low major trend reversal. Another micro double bottom. We went down. We went up. On this bar we also went down again. A little bit more down on the next bar. And we reversed up a second time. The market three times tried to go down. Here. Here. And then from this high to this low. All three times failed. When the market repeatedly tries to do something and fails, it often then tries to do the opposite. Here we tried to go to a new low. Here. And here. Twice failed. Did the opposite. The market went up and down on this bar. And went up on the next bar. And then down on the third bar. Micro double top. Up, down, up, and then down. It's also a big double top with here. The bulls tried to resume the trend again. Two legs up. One pull back two. And it's stalling. This high is testing that high. So it's a double top. Will the bull trend break out and continue up? Or will it reverse down? We don't know. Double top bear flag. We sold off of four consecutive bear bars after a big double top. This could be the start of a big bear trend. Instead, the double top bear flag triggered. It went below the low of the signal bar. But immediately reversed up. And it became a failed double top bear flag. Instead, it became a double bottom bull flag. Bull trend. A reversal attempt. Tried to reverse up. Tried to reverse down again. And we got a double bottom at the prior low. The bears failed to get their double top bear flag. And we got a double bottom bull flag. It's a small trading range. Trading ranges always have both a double top and a double bottom. When a pullback is small. When a pullback is small, I use the term flag. Because it signifies trend resumption is more likely than trend reversal. I talk about this more on the video on pullbacks and bar counting. A bear flag is a small bull trend. And like any bull trend, it can end with a double top. Bear trend. And we have a pullback into a small bull trend. It ended with a double top. Bear trend. A pullback into a bigger bull trend. But it also ended with a double top. Here. It tried to end here, but failed. And then there was a smaller double top here. Bear trends often have double top bear flags. Bull trends often have double bottom bull flags. Bull trend, double bottom bull flag. Never lose sight of the goal. Flags are never perfect or rarely perfect. What you're doing is looking to enter at the end of the pullback, planning for resumption of the trend. A bull flag, it's a small bear trend. And like any bear trend, it can end with a double bottom. Many examples. We have an early bull trend. And we have a micro double bottom here. It became a bull flag. The bull trend continued. Tried to reverse down. Tried to reverse down. Another small double bottom. Bull trend resumed. And then another reversal attempt. A one bar bear trend. A one bar bear trend. And we got a double bottom bull flag. This was an attempt at a double top bear flag. Instead we got a micro double bottom. And another micro double bottom. A double top bear flag. In a double top bear flag. In a double top bear flag. The bulls are trying to reverse the market. And they become disappointed and sell out of their longs. And the bear trend resumes. And the bears are confident that the bull trend reversal will fail. And they sell as well. A second top and a double top bear flag. A second top and a double top bear flag. Is often a lot higher or lower than the first. It's a low 2 sell setup. Here we have a very small double top bear flag. Bear trend. Here we have a bigger bear trend. And an attempt at a double top bear flag. And then another attempt at a double top bear flag. And this one succeeded. This bull channel is so strong. A lot of bears waited for a second entry to sell. So they'll sell either below that bull bar. The neckline of this small double top. They'll sell here. Or they'll sell below that bear bar with the stock. In a bull trend. There's often a double bottom bull flag. And it's two attempts by the bears to reverse the bull trend. They become disappointed and buy back their shorts. The bulls are confident that the bears are going to be a bull. And they buy as well. The bears twice tried to reverse. And they gave up. They twice tried to reverse. They gave up. They twice tried to reverse. Here and here. And they gave up. Here. They tried to reverse. Here and here. And gave up. They tried to sell off. Here and here. And gave up. And this sell off. As strong as it was. It's a bear trend. It's a pullback from this rally. So it's also a bull. A bull flag. Remember a bull flag is a bear trend. A small bear trend. A small bear trend. Every major trend reversal top is a type of double top. It's an attempt by the bulls to make the bull trend resume. Yet the bull trend fails around the prior high and reverses a second time. Every major trend reversal top is a type of a double top. It's an attempt by the bulls to make the bull trend resume, yet the bull trend fails around the prior high and reverses a second time. Let's say there was a bull trend to the left here, and it rallied, and it tried to reverse. It rallied again to a slightly higher high and reversed again. Higher high major trend reversal. Every major trend reversal bottom is a type of double bottom. The first reversal is a bear flag. The bear trend tries to resume, and it reverses up a second time, and the second reversal up is a major trend reversal. Bear trend, the first reversal up, probably minor, and it will lead to a resumption of the bear trend. If it reverses up a second time, then traders will be thinking that the bears are failing twice. Maybe the market is going to reverse. Higher low major trend reversal. Major trend reversals, they are minor double tops and double bottoms on higher timeframe charts. Likewise, minor reversals can be major on smaller timeframe charts. But on the chart in front of me, this is a major trend reversal, and it's a reasonable swing trade. You can see more about this in the videos on major trend reversals. I talked a little bit about why double tops and bottoms work. I'm going to talk more about that here. A double top, why does it often lead to a reversal down? Let's say there was a rally here. Some bull bought this high. Every price on every chart, there was a bull and a bear. Somebody bought and somebody else sold, taking the opposite side of the trade. This bull bought here, thinking the market was going to go higher. Or he thought that if it reversed down, the reversal would be minor, and then the bull trend would resume and he'd be able to get out around his original price. He was not expecting a bear trend. Again, assume there's a big bull trend to the left that we do not see. He's buying, confident that the first reversal will be minor, and the worst that he'll get is the trading range. And when the market gets up to the top of the range, he'll be able to exit with a profit. If he bought here, he was confident that the worst the bears would be able to do is create a trading range. So if he buys here, he was confident that he'll be able to get out break even, because this would probably be near the top of the range. He's confident the first reversal would be either a bear leg in a trading range or a bull flag. So he buys here, gets out break even here. Some bulls will buy more above this bar, and they'll make a profit on that second entry. Once the bulls see a reasonably strong sell-off, they start wondering if the bull trend has ended and has evolved into a trading range or even a bear trend. And because of that, they'll often look to sell out of their longs around the prior high. If they sell enough, and if bears are confident that they can reverse the market, they'll sell strongly as well, and they can get a reversal 40% of the time. Some bulls are confident that at best the bears get a trading range and not a bear trend, so they'll buy a reversal up, expecting a trading range to come back up here, and possibly the bull trend will resume. However, they'll be sufficiently disappointed by this sell-off that they'll either try to get out of all their position here, or at least part of their position here. So bulls will sell around the prior high. Once it gets up there and reverses, reverses, reverses, traders are starting to think that this could be a major trend reversal down. If enough bulls sell and enough bears sell, instead of a trading range, the market could form a major trend reversal. Again, it's reversing around the prior high. This is a slightly higher high, but it's a double top major trend reversal, slightly higher high major trend reversal. We have a bear trend, and bears are selling all the way down, and there has to be a bull taking the opposite side of the trade. Bulls are buying as well, but some bear sold at the very bottom of this bear trend, expecting lower prices. His belief was, it's a strong enough bear trend, the first reversal up will be minor, which means a trading range or a bear flag. He expects the first reversal up to fail, and come back down to around his original entry price, and he'll be able to get out with either a small loss, or possibly even a profit. When the bears see 8 or 9 consecutive bull bars like this, they're beginning to think that the bull trend has probably ended, and the market has now evolved into a bull trend. It's a big down, big up, big confusion, probably a trading range. Once it's in a trading range, it then could either resume down or reverse up. Because the bears believe the first reversal up will be a bear flag, or a bull leg in a trading range, they'll sell below a bear bar, like below that bear bar, below this bear bar, below that bear bar. I personally do not take the first reversal down after 8 consecutive bull bars, but I would start thinking about selling below a small double top here or a bigger double top here, expecting that either the bear trend would resume or after a bull leg in a trading range, we would get a bear leg in a trading range. In either case, I expect the market to come down and test around this low. The bears who did sell here, let's say a bear sold here and he sold more anywhere up here, he's hoping the market comes down to his prior low so he could get out, break even on this short and with a profit on these shorts. He sees a strong breakout and he's hopeful, but it reverses up. It reverses up and it's reversing up a third time, a lot of the bears will give up and that's what took place here. The bears giving up and the bulls buying. The bears are sold here and sold more here. They got a small profit here and they have a small loss here. The bears are now wondering with all of these failed sell off attempts, is this now not just a trading range, but a higher low major trend reversal? The bears are giving up right here. Bears and bulls buying, it creates a reversal. It could simply be a trading range. Here it was a swing up, so this ended up as a successful high or low major trend reversal. It's a type of double bottom. Market sold off, found buyers at this price. It sold off again, found buyers around that price a second time and the bears gave up. Any time there's a trend reversal and it does not look particularly strong, not enough bars, it's probably a minor reversal and not a major reversal. However, minor reversals can often lead to big moves, at least big enough for a scalp and often big enough for a swing trade. Sometimes a minor reversal becomes a major reversal. When there's a minor reversal, like here or even here, it's usually followed by an attempt at trend resumption. And a minor reversal therefore is usually a leg in a trading range or in a flag. Minor reversal, minor reversal, minor reversal, trading range. A minor reversal up, it became a bull flag that failed. A minor reversal down, resumed up, reversed down again. This is a minor reversal in this bear trend, it became a bear flag. A minor reversal, bull flag. Probably a minor reversal when the channel was this tight, it became a bull flag. A minor reversal up, it became a bear flag, but it did not fall very far. Up and down, minor reversal. This is even a minor reversal. A big bull trend, maybe a 50% pullback, not quite. First reversal down and a tight bull channel. Probably a minor reversal and a bull flag or a trading range. It's both. It's a trading range. We don't yet know if the bull trend will resume up or if the bears will get a lower high major trend reversal and a reversal down. Whenever I see a minor reversal, I assume a flag or a trading range. The odds of a major trend reversal are small. I use the term micro double top or micro double bottom for a double top or a double bottom that has only 2, 3, 4, 5 bars on it. On a smaller time frame chart, you could have 10 or 20 bars and be a regular double top or a double bottom. But on this chart, if I see a double top or a double bottom that is 5 bars or less, 4 bars or less, I call it a micro double top or a small double top. A micro double top, small probability of a big reversal. But it's usually important confirmation if it's also part of a bigger double top. It increases the probability. For example, we have a 3 bar or 4 bar double top here. I call it a micro double top, micro double bottom here. But this micro double bottom is testing this low. This micro double bottom is the end of a second leg and a bigger double bottom. This micro double top is the end of a second leg and a bigger double top. Same here. A micro double top here and here. Micro double top here and here. But part of a bigger double top. It's the second leg of a bigger double top. It increases the probability that the double top reversal will be successful. Here, a micro double bottom and then another micro double bottom. It increases the probability that this double bottom will lead to a swing trade up. I've been talking mostly about reversals. And now I want to talk about continuation patterns, pullbacks, flags. We have a bull trend. Not particularly strong, but a bull trend. The bears tried to reverse. The bull trend resumed. The bears tried to reverse again. Traders will expect that the pattern is not big enough for a major trend reversal and therefore it's probably a minor reversal and therefore either a trading range or a bull flag. When it gets near this prior low, they expect the bulls to come back again. The bulls bought at this price. Maybe they'll buy at this price again. They'll look to buy a reversal up. A minor reversal down led to a double bottom bull flag. A smaller one here. The bears tried to reverse. They tried to reverse again. Minor reversals. It led to a double bottom bull flag. I'm calling this a double bottom. The second low is slightly below that low, but it's still a double bottom. It's a double bottom bull flag. A double bottom and a bull trend. Not a big enough pattern for a major reversal and therefore it's a pullback. And I call it a double bottom bull flag. The bulls buying. If they buy above this bar, they might put their stop here. Or they might put their stop here. In either case, if they're stopped out, unless there's a major reversal down, they'll look to buy again on another reversal up. An early bear trend. Bulls tried to reverse. They tried to reverse here. They tried to reverse here. We got close to that high. To me, it's a double top. This is a small double top here. Some bears would sell below here and put a stop a little bit above here. Maybe above the sell climax. We're going up again. Again the bulls are trying to reverse. But the pattern is too small. We only had five small bull bars here. This is probably not a higher low major trend reversal. Bear trend. Not enough of a bull breakout for this to be a major reversal. So it's probably a minor reversal leading to either a trading range. Or a bear flag. Traders will look to sell a reversal down. So they'll sell below the low of that bar. Below the low of this bar. Below the low of that bar. They'll sell somewhere around here. Some traders will sell with limit orders just below that high. Betting that we'll get a double top and the bear trend will resume. Computers don't care if the double tops and double bottoms are identical. Usually they're not identical. If the second low is a little bit lower. You can call it a double bottom bull flag. You can call it an ABC bull flag. ABC. You can go to high two bull flag. Try to reverse back up once with a high one. And now a second time a high two. You can call it a failed bear breakout. We have a bull trend. A failed bear breakout. A lot of times it's a triangle. Three pushes down. One at the bottom of this bull bar. Two, three. Doesn't matter what you call it. You have to understand the process. Not enough bars for a major trend reversal. Probably going to be a minor reversal or a trading range. Traders expect the reversal to fail. And they'll look to buy a reversal up. Especially a second reversal up. The same with here. Minor reversal. The bears again tried. And the bears will give up above a bull bar. And that's one of the reasons why high two bull flags work so well. The bears hold after the first reversal down. But if it reverses up twice. If the bull trend resumes twice. If the bears twice fail to reverse. They give up. Especially above a bull bar. And that's why a high two bull flag and a bull trend is a high probability buy. The bears give up. Does not matter if the two tops and a bear flag are identical. You just have to understand what the process is. Here it's slightly lower. You can call it a double top bear flag. You can call it a lower high double top bear flag. You can call it an ABC pullback. A. B. C. Sometimes it's a triangle. Doesn't matter. The pattern is too small for a major reversal. This is too small for a major trend reversal up. It's probably going to be a bear flag. Leading to trend resumption down. Triple bottoms. You don't hear the term used all that often. Some traders want triple bottoms. For triple tops to be perfect. Exactly at the same price three times. Very rare. However, you often get what I call a triple top like this or a triple bottom like this. One, two, three. Where it's not quite perfect, but it's still three attempts in one direction. You try to reverse up. Try to reverse up. Try to reverse up a third time. Even a fourth time. If you want, you can call this a triple bottom. You can simply call it a trading range. You can call it a double bottom high or low major trend reversal. Sometimes when you get a tight trading range late in a trend, here a bear trend, and you get a double bottom. Even though it's only a tight trading range, it can be enough to lead to a major reversal. That double bottom forms a triple bottom with the bottom of the bear trend. The market tried to go down, reverse up. Tried to go down, reverse up. Tried to go down, reverse up. Three times. Tried to go down a fourth time, reverse up. If the market keeps trying to do something and fails, it usually tries to do the opposite. Again, different computers have different algorithms. They'll apply different names to the pattern. Here, we had four attempts by the bears to resume the bear trend. It's clear the market is struggling to go lower. It's probably gone too far down. So it's going to start probing in the opposite direction. Some traders will look at this as a wedge bottom. Three pushes down. One, pull back. Two, pull back. Three. And then we had a micro double bottom. And then we had a double bottom, higher or low, major trend reversal. And then we had a break out. And then a pull back from this double bottom, higher or low, major trend reversal. In this particular case, that's how I would read this. I would see it as a wedge bottom. Weak reversal up. A tight trading range with a double bottom in it. I would call that a double bottom, higher or low, major trend reversal. This is the break out from it. And this is the pull back. If you want, you can also call it a small expanding triangle. Up, down, more up, more down, up, and then down again. A trading range with three pushes up. It doesn't matter if the three pushes are up or down. Whenever I see a trading range and I see three pushes, I call it a triangle. If you want, you can call this the first push down. So it could be one, two, three. I would personally look at it this way. Three pushes up. The market's trying to go up repeatedly and failing. Maybe it'll probe in the other direction. Another way to do it, reverse down, reverse down, reverse down. A triangle here. We have another reversal down. You can redraw it and call it a triangle here. One, two, three. Or one, two, three. We have three pushes down. Three reversals up. One, two, three. You can call it a triangle there. We're trying to reverse up here. Fourth reversal up. It doesn't matter how you describe it. You have to understand the process. The market is repeatedly trying to reverse. All triangles contain double tops and double bottoms. We have a double top. And we have a second double top. And we have a double bottom. The market's in breakout mode. 50% chance the market will go up. 50% chance the bear trend will resume down. We have consecutive double tops here. Double top. And then another double top. Consecutive double bottoms here. Double bottom. And an attempt at a double bottom here, even though we never really reversed up. Double bottom. And this double bottom has a micro double bottom for the first push down. Big bear bar. A second consecutive bear bar. The bulls are giving up. And we're probably going to get at least one more leg down. First leg, pull back, second leg. Strong enough breakout. Bulls and bears both agree this price is too high. It has to go lower. Second leg down likely. The bulls who did not sell out here now decide the market's going down. They look for any rally to sell. So the bulls will sell, creating a second leg down. The bears who did not sell initially are looking for any kind of a pullback to sell. They also expect a second leg down. On the rally, bulls and bears are going to sell. Bulls will sell out of their longs. They bought up here. They sell out here with a loss. And the bears will sell as well. Both expect that the price is too high and they'll be at least a second leg down. Three pushes up. One, two, three. A smaller triangle. And a bear breakout. Strong enough breakout for at least a small second leg down. Here the second leg down was very small. Not profitable for bears who sold here. Different computers see things differently. Some computers will call this an expanding triangle bottom. Even though it's rising, it's still an expanding triangle. First push, second push, third push. Or smaller version. First push, second push, third push. Again, it does not matter how you call it. Consecutive double bottoms. We have a double bottom. Another double bottom. Another double bottom. And each second bottom is slightly higher. So we're getting higher lows. Possibly an early bull trend. Triple bottom. One, two, three. Or one, two, three. The bulls gave up. The bears tried again to reverse. But a higher low. And then the bulls bought very aggressively up. And the bears gave up. The market was repeatedly trying to go down and failing. At some point, the bulls and bears both agree the price is too low. The market has gone down too far. It probably has to go higher to find where the fair price is. And it did so violently here. Trading ranges always contain double tops and double bottoms. It's in breakout mode. It's in breakout mode. Will the bulls succeed? Will this double bottom lead to a rally? Will the bears succeed? Will this double top lead to a sell-off? Some computers believe the rally is more likely. Other computers believe the trend resumption down is more likely. Once you get a trading range that has 20 or more bars, the probability of a bull breakout becomes the same as the probability of a bear breakout. It's in breakout mode. And you can see when we broke below the double bottom, everyone agreed price was going lower. We have a big breakout bar and a good follow-through bar. Bear trend, a trading range. Every trading range contains some kind of a double bottom and some kind of a double top. We got trend resumption down. The bears overpowered the bulls. The bulls gave up. Initially, you're looking for a measured move down based upon the height of the double top. Double top, neckline, fell for a measured move down, and there was buying. Bears took partial profits. Bulls may have scaled in expecting a test of the breakout point. Another trading range. We have a double bottom and a double top. Breakout mode. Once it lasts about 20 bars or so, breakout mode, the chance of trend reversal up is the same as trend reversal down. Again, the bears overpowered the bulls. And maybe two small legs down. One pullback, two. Same process. Double bottom, another double bottom. Double top or double top here and here. Breakout mode. Here we got trend resumption down, trend resumption down. Instead, now we're getting trend reversal up. Again, when a pullback grows to 20 or more bars, I start referring to it as a trading range. And when I do that, I'm doing it because I think the probability is no longer in favor of trend resumption down. Initially, this is a bear flag. A pullback in a bear trend. At some point, you have to decide the bears have lost control and it's now neutral. Again, a pullback in a bear trend. But if it grows to enough bars, the probability of trend reversal up becomes almost as high as the probability of trend resumption down. And a third trading range. It's a pullback initially. It's a bear flag. Maybe still a bear flag. But at some point, you've got to be thinking that instead of a pullback, maybe it's a trading range. And once you do, you have to be thinking that the probability of a reversal up is about the same as the probability of a resumption of the bear trend down. I began by talking about it's really important to understand that double tops and double bottoms are not perfect and you have to be very flexible. I then talked about why double tops and double bottoms work. At a double top, for example, the market went up. It tried to reverse. The bull trend resumed and it might reverse a second time. If it reverses a second time, the bulls who bought at the top of the first leg up will panic and they will sell out of their lungs. If enough bulls sell out and enough bears begin shorting, you can get a reversal. If a double top or a double bottom is small and it's within a trend, it's probably a flag, a pullback. The odds are the trend will resume. For example, if you're in a bear trend and you have a rally and the rally is small compared to the bear trend. There's a pullback in that rally and the bulls try again to resume up and they fail a second time and the pattern is less than 20 bars, chances are it's a double top bear flag and the bear trend will resume. I'm Al Brooks. Okay. Thank you.