 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on buying and selling pressure. I'll begin by talking about what I mean when I talk about buying and selling pressure. And then next I'll talk about the importance of gaps. When trading, traders always have to be paying attention to signs of strength. And one way to think about it is buying and selling pressure. Bars often show that either the bulls or the bears are stronger. And when the price action favors the bulls, it's buying pressure. So for example, we've got a strong bull breakout, a series of bull bars, very little overlap. As soon as this bar closed, they bought it. You can see the low of this big bar does not fall much below the close of this bull bar. Again, here, consecutive bull bars closing near their highs, not much overlap between the two bars. Compare that to this. Here we have a big bear reversal bar. Here we have a series of bear bars, several of them closing on their lows and the bars are fairly large. That is a sign that the bears are reasonably strong and it usually means lower prices will follow. Bulls buy to make the market go up. And when they buy aggressively, you get bars that look like this. And that's a sign of good buying pressure and usually means that the market will go higher. And bears sell to make the market go down. And when you get a series of bear bars closing on their lows, that's usually a sign that the bears are strong. There's a lot of pressure driving the market down and lower prices are likely. The bulls and bears cannot hide it. These bars are telling you that the institutions are buying much more aggressively than they are selling and higher prices are likely. And I refer to these as footprints. When you get signs that the bulls are strong buying pressure or signs when the bears are strong, it's selling pressure. It means that the institutions are trying to move the market and there's fairly uniform opinion in the institutions. And that usually means that the trend will continue. Whenever the market is pretty clear, this is clearly bullish. Big bull bars closing on their highs, not much overlap between the bars. That's a sign that the bulls are in control. And that clarity is due to the buying pressure. These bars that look like this and again like that. So what am I looking for? I want to see more bull bars than bear bars when I'm looking for buying pressure. I want to see consecutive bull bars. I want to see bull bodies that are bigger than the bear bodies. I want bars closing near their high and at least above the midpoint. I want to see bull microchannels. A bull bar and then another bull bar and another bull bar and no pullbacks. I want tails below the bars and not above the bars. I want bull breakout bars with gaps. In other words, the close of the bar above the high of the prior bar or above the high of many prior bars. And I want follow through. After a good bull bar, I want another good bull bar. And I want to see the number of consecutive bull bars increasing. If I look to the left on the chart 20 or 30 bars ago, there were two or three bull bars. I want to see four or five consecutive bull bars now. I also like to see the bull bars getting bigger instead of smaller. I want the bodies to get bigger. And I also want the number of consecutive bear bars to get smaller. If there were three consecutive bear bars 20 bars ago, I only want to see one or two bear bars at a time. And I want the bear bodies to get small. All right, let's take a look at this chart. First thing that is striking is that there are more bull bars than bear bars. And that there are also consecutive bull bars. There are four bull bars here and five consecutive bull bars here. And look at the size of the bull bodies and compare them to the bear bodies. The bull bodies are bigger than the bear bodies. I want to see bull bars closing on their highs. Or only having small tails on top like this, like this. Here's one with a big tail, but it's only one of the past six or seven bars. Bull bar closing near its high, near its high. Certainly at least above its midpoint. I also like to see bull micro channels, a series of bull bars where the low of every bar is at or above the low of the prior bar. Bulls are not waiting to buy pullbacks. They're simply buying at the close. Or if the market pulls back just a tiny bit, they start to buy. I want to see tails on the bottoms of bars, which is a sign that the bears tried to break out. And the bulls bought the breakout and reversed it up. And I like to see gaps, either between the close of a bar and the high of the prior bar, or the low of a bar and the high of a prior bar. Again, the low of this bar is above the high of that bar. There's a gap. That is a sign of strong buying. I want to see the bull bars getting bigger. So we have a few bull bars here and then a bigger one. A bull bar here and then a bigger one. Bull bar here and then a bigger one. I want to see surges in the buying. And I don't want to see consecutive bear bars. A bear bar, okay, but it's followed by a bull bar. Good for the bulls. Same here and here. Also, I want the bear bars to get smaller instead of bigger. So we've got a bear bar here, a smaller bear bar here. Let me talk a little bit about our bear trend and the opposite of what I just talked about is true for the bears. I want signs that the bears are clearly in control. And that clarity comes from selling pressure. I want to see more bear bars than bull bars. I want to see consecutive bear bars. I want the bear bodies to be bigger than the bull bodies. I want the bear bars closing near their lows or at least below the midpoint. I want bear micro channels. No pullbacks. I want the high of every bar to be at or below the high of the prior bar. I want tails on the tops of bars, which is a sign that every time the bulls try to reverse the market up, the bears sell it off into the close of the bar. I want bear bars with gaps and I want follow through. So I want the close of a bar below the low of the prior bar. I want the high of a bar to be below the low of several prior bars. I want the number of consecutive bear bars to increase. I want more and more bear bars. I like to see the bear bodies getting bigger. I want to see the number of consecutive bull bars decreasing. And I want the bull bodies to be getting smaller. Let's look at this. We have three bear bars, three, four bear bars here, five bear bars here. A lot of consecutive bear bars. And the bear bodies are bigger than the bull bodies. Look at the bull bodies here and here. They're small compared to all the bear bars. A sign that the bears are strong. And when there is a tail below a bear bar, I want the tail to be small. I want very little buying into the close of the bar. I want the bears to own the bar right into the close. Also, no pullbacks. So here we have about eight or nine bars where every high is at or below the high of the prior bar. So it's a bear micro channel. That's a sign of relentless selling. I also want to see tails above bars. This doji bar at one point was a strong bull bar, but into the close the bears took control and sold it off. So every reversal attempt by the bulls, the bears win by the end of the bar. I want to see gaps. I want to see the close of a bar below the low of a prior bar. And I want to see the high of a bar below the low of a prior bar. So we have a gap. Here, the close of this bar below that bar. The high of this bar below the low of that bar. There's a gap. And I want to see follow through selling. So after a bear bar, I want to see another bear bar. Small bear bar, bigger bear bar. Small bear bars, bigger bear bar. I want the bear bodies to get bigger, not smaller. I want to see momentum picking up on the downside. And I want to see bull bars either be small or getting small. So if I see multiple bull bars, I prefer them to be smaller, the bodies to be smaller. A sign of the bulls losing interest. In a training range, the bears are very strong and then the bulls are strong. Bulls are strong and then the bears are strong. And the bulls are strong. Both the bulls and the bears are fighting over the direction of the breakout. I always pay attention to signs of buying and selling pressure. Because it often helps me anticipate the direction of the breakout. And it can allow me to enter early before the breakout. Let's take a look at this chart. So we have a bull bar. A bull bar is owned by the bulls. And bear trend bars are owned by the bears. In a trend, one side is clearly in control. The bulls are in control here. Bears are in control there. And when the bulls are in control, I expect higher prices. And when the bears are in control, I expect lower prices. I'm going to talk a little bit about gaps. I'm going to talk a little bit about the bulls. A gap is simply a space between any support and resistance. And here's an obvious gap. A big space between here and there. This becomes support. And this was resistance. And now the market has broken above it. Gap between this low and these highs as well. This area was resistance. The market broke above it. And now it's support. Gap between that low and that high. Different ways to view the gaps. Different computers see them differently. I sometimes talk about negative gaps. And a negative gap simply means that there's some overlap. Here we broke out above this breakout point. And then we pulled back. But the pullback is below the breakout point. I call that a negative gap. When there's not much overlap between the pullback and the breakout point. And then the trend resumes. That's important. It's still a sign of a strong bull trend. But it's not as strong as when there is a gap. An actual gap. When there's a little bit of overlap. It works the same as a gap. But it's not as reliable. It does not have the same probability of higher prices. Gaps often lead to measured moves. So we have a gap this high and this low. It's a negative gap. There's some overlap. Here we got a double bottom. Neckline. Break above the neckline. Measured move up. And when you reach your measured move target. You get some profit taking by the bulls. And again here. And you also have bears knowing the bulls will take profits. So the bears sell for a scalp. A lot of gaps. Not so obvious. I use gaps differently from how anyone else I've ever seen use the term gaps. But I use the definitions that I use because they help find trades. They make sense. But I use the same. Here we have a gap between the low of this bar. And the high of that bar. That is a sign of strength. We get a gap between this close and that high. A gap between this close and that high. Again signs of strength. We have a pullback. But this low stayed slightly above that high. So there's an actual gap here. And it's important. On a smaller time frame chart. This doji. This tail would be a high. And this would be a low. And there would be a gap between the two. So it tested the high. This is a breakout point. And here's a breakout. And this pullback tested the breakout. And the bulls walked and resumed up. And then look up here. We had a bull bar. But it sold off on the close. And the close was below that high. That's a sign that the bulls are getting weaker. We got a sell off here. Big gap down. And I always think of a gap as any space on the chart. It's usually a space between support and resistance. This was a support area. The market broke below it. And now that area is resistance. And there are other gaps in this chart as well. For example, right at this moment, there's a gap between this high and that low. And that gap quickly closed. And ultimately, even this gap closed. Negative gaps. We got a bare breakout and a pullback. But the pullback is above the breakout point. So I call that negative gap. And again, it functions just like any other gap, except that it has a lower probability of leading to a measured move down. It's usually a sign that the bears are not as strong as they could have been. Gaps often lead to measured moves, even when there's a negative gap. The way I look at this is as follows. The market sold off and rallied. And it sold off again, but did not rally much. I think of it as an attempt at a double bottom. So we rallied. We sold off trying to get a double bottom, but no double bottom at all. But I'm still thinking that, okay, it's possible failed double bottom. And therefore, I want to look to see what the market does around the measured move down. And I think that's how the market views it. When you got a low here and then a sell off, a lot of times it bounces and you get a double bottom. And if the market then breaks below the double bottom, you look for a measured move down. Other times, it doesn't even stop at the prior low. So there really is no double bottom. It breaks below that low. I still think of it as an attempt by the bulls to create a double bottom, but the bulls were so weak that there was no bounce at all. Because it was an attempt to create a double bottom, if we break below it, I'm looking for a measured move down. Anytime I see a bull breakout and a reversal below that bull breakout, I think of it as a failed double bottom. And I look for a measured move down based upon the height of the bull breakout. If we did bounce here, we would say, okay, we've got a double bottom. We're bouncing. We're bouncing. And if it fails, we'll get the measured move down. Here, we did not get the bounce, but I'm still looking for the measured move down. Lots of gaps on this chart. Easy to overlook. The close of this bar, the low of that bar. There's a gap between the close of this bar and the low of that bar. There's a gap between the high of this bar and the low of that bar. A gap between the high of this bar and the low of that bar. We have a gap here. This closed that low, but it immediately closed on the next bar. So the bears are getting weaker. They're unable to keep their gaps open. And that's a sign that the market might soon evolve into a trading range. So, in this video, I talked about buying and selling pressure. And I also talked about gaps. And I use gap in a much different way from anybody else. And I do so because I think the way I use it helps traders find and manage trades. I'm Al Brooks. This is the first of two videos on buying and selling pressure. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. 그렇ma si imagery, as a TV près tv Tuấnーモ