 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on climaxes. In this video, I'm going to be talking about V-tops and bottoms. I rarely ever use the term V-top or V-bottom because V-tops and bottoms usually are something else. Very strong bull breakout and then a very strong reversal down. It's a V-top. Perfect V-tops and V-bottoms are extremely rare, usually only present on smaller timeframe charts like one-minute charts or five-minute charts, usually news-related. And even when they occur, there's usually a more complex pattern on a smaller timeframe chart like a wedge or a parabolic wedge. I always find something else. Whenever I see something that someone might call a V-top here, they would call it a V-top. Some traders use the phrase inverted V because it's an upside-down V. I always know there's something else and I always look for something else. For example, if this was a bull trend and then a trading range, this would be a higher high major trend reversal. There's also a parabolic wedge, one, two, three. And then there's a smaller wedge on a smaller timeframe chart. We went up, we went down, we went up, we went down, we went up. We went up. The more reasons to enter on the reversal on the sell, the higher the probability that you'll make money. Wedge, one, two, three. And it's subdivided into a smaller wedge. One, down, two, down, three. A nested wedge. A bare inside bar after a biclimax. A biclimax, you expect at least a small second leg up. This pause could be a one bar final flag leading to a reversal down, which it was. Parabolic wedge, one, two, three. We got a climactic reversal, but eventually there's always going to be a lower high. If that lower high retraces a third or more of the initial leg down, then that lower high is a lower high major trend reversal. Again, if you have a reversal down after a biclimax, and then a pullback to a lower high, and that lower high retraces at least a third of the sell-off, I would call this a lower high major trend reversal. We have a bull trend, a strong bear breakout, a two-legged rally to a lower high. Traders will sell below the low of that bar, taking a chance that we'll get a swing down. We have a strong bull breakout, and initially there's a gap between the close of this bar and the high of any of these bars. We went sideways. We have a biclimax, but we did not reverse all the way to the bottom of the biclimax, and we did not close the gap, at least not for 30 or 40 bars. The minimum goal after a biclimax, a pause in the trend. Here we've got a trading range that lasted about 30 or 40 bars, maybe 50 bars. And then the market decides whether to resume up or reverse down. Here it did both. It resumed up, and that failed. A biclimax, a climactic end of the trend, and we've got a bear trend in the opposite direction. We have a biclimax, pause trading range. A biclimax, trading range. A biclimax, now a reversal. Sell climax, tried to reverse, it became a bear flag. Sell climax, tried to reverse, it became a bear flag. Most climactic reversals are followed by trading ranges and not opposite trends. Bull trend, trading range, trend resumption up. A big breakout, big bull trend bar, so therefore a breakout. And a climax. We have a gap that closed to this bar and the high of that bar, and it closed on the very next bar. So this became an exhaustion gap. This closed to that high. And not only did it end the bull trend, it led to a reversal. We have a bear breakout. You can call this a bear breakout as well. It's a bear trend bar, and therefore it's a breakout, and it's a sell climax. This reversal led to a trend down. We have a bull trend, a weak bull trend, and then we have an exceptionally strong bull bar. It's a surprise bar. Nobody was expecting that. And therefore it's a low probability event. A lot of bulls will see this as an exceptional gift, a surprise gift, and they'll use it to take profits. If they take profits, they're not looking to buy again on the next bar. They'll usually wait 5 or 10 bars to see if the bears will get a reversal. If the bears fail to get a reversal, then the bulls are willing to buy again and try to get trend resumption up. The bears know that the bulls have a gift here, and strong bears will sell, at least for a scalp, betting that the bulls will take profits. Why would the bulls take profits? They don't want to take a chance that this gift quickly disappears and they lose all of their profits. For example, right here, a similar bar, a very big bull trend bar, a very big bull trend bar. The bulls took profits. Here, the bulls who did not take profits ended up giving back all of their profits. That's why smart bulls always take at least partial profits whenever they have a surprisingly big bull trend bar. There's no one left to buy at this price. The market has to go sideways and then decides if the market can reverse. If it cannot, the bulls will buy again. What about the strong bears? The strong bears will sell here and they'll sell more here. They're never going to buy back their shorts. Part of what is taking place here is weak bears are buying back shorts. They're looking at a weak rally. They're betting that eventually it'll turn into a trading range and they're selling. They're selling below bars. They're selling above bars. And then they see this. The market's racing up quickly. They cannot take the pain. They buy back their shorts. The weak bears are buying, causing the market to go up. The weak bears are buying, causing the market to go up. The weak bulls are buying as well. They're looking at the trend saying, it's not all that strong. I need signs of strength. And then the market starts to accelerate up and the weak bulls start to buy and they find themselves buying at the top of the bull trend. Exactly where the strong bulls are taking profits and exactly where the strong bears are selling. Here the strong bears were unable to get a bear trend, but they were able to get a scalp trade and the strong bulls bought again. Strong bulls took profits. Strong bears sold. And this time the bears were able to get a reversal down. The weak bulls buying late in the trend, they're just not strong enough. They don't have enough dollars to keep the bull trend going. And the strong bulls take profits and they're only looking to buy again lower. And they'll only buy again if the bears are unable to create a bear trend. So the strong bulls will be buying here. They will not be buying after they see the strong reversal down. If you're a strong bull taking profits here or here, you're not looking to buy again on the next bar. You're probably going to wait 10 bars, 20 bars to give a chance to the bears. You know, will the bears be able to reverse the trend? If they are, the strong bulls are not going to buy. If the bears are not able to reverse the trend and instead the market simply goes sideways, then the bulls will be willing to buy again. Again, the bulls take profits because the market might go sideways or it might reverse. And they don't want to be holding onto their trade and have all of their profits disappear. So, we're going to see how we're going to get a bear trend. Strong bear breakout. A gap between this close and this low. This close and these lows. Another bear bar. So now the gap is this close and that low. This close and the trading range low. Possible gap. This close and that low. This close and the low before the start of the sell climax. It's a big gift. The bears were not expecting a big breakout this late in a bear trend. Weak bears who did not sell here see this as the start of a big new leg down and they're selling late. Strong bears see this as a surprise, a gift, and they'll use it to buy back shorts. They'll certainly buy back their shorts here. And then they'll wait 5, 10, 20 bars to see if the bulls can reverse the trend. If the bulls can reverse the trend, the bears will wait to sell until the rally gets weak. And then the bears will sell again. Bulls buy because they bet the strong bears will take profits and that the market will go sideways to up for 5 or 10 bars. They'll get a great new set that possibly could reverse. Some will buy the close of these bear bars. Some will buy above the strong bull reversal bar. reversal bar. We have a reversal up. You can call it a B bottom. Very strong sell off. Very abrupt reversal up. Eventually, there will be a pullback to a higher low. And it was here. And another one here. Higher low. As soon as the pullback retraces at least a third of the reversal up, traders start to think about a possible higher low major trend reversal. Very tight bear channel. Most traders would not buy that. This is probably a minor reversal, not a major reversal. Now we have two legs down. One pullback two. And this subdivided into one pullback two. This would be a higher probability buy. But it's still a pretty tight channel here and a pretty tight channel here. A lot of traders will wait for a second or third entry before buying. This is a higher low major trend reversal as is this. Here at least you have an IOI with the bull bar. So a second entry buy. This is a higher probability buy. I would not take that buy for a major trend reversal. This one I would consider taking it or I would wait to buy above here. It did not lead to a reversal. At least not on this chart. It might ultimately have. But at this point, the major trend reversal bulls got what they get 60% of the time. Either a small win or a small loss. 40% of the time they get an actual swing trade up. Bear trend. Bull breakout. Traders start to look to buy a higher or low major trend reversal. Here, here or here. Smaller bear trend. Strong breakout. Again, major trend reversal. In this particular case, at least at the end of this chart, there was no reversal. It just continued sideways. But it is reasonable to take that buy. 40% chance you're going to get a swing up. First target this high, which is more than twice the size of the initial risk that the bulls take by taking these buys. Higher probability. Instead of taking the initial major trend reversal buy, you wait to see if we get a strong bull breakout and then buy. And we did not get that. Many types of gaps. We have a gap this close and this high, this close and that high. We have another bar. Now we have a two bar biclimax. So the gap is now this close and that high and that close and this high. And then we have another breakout here. A new gap this close and that high. That gap closed immediately on the very next bar. Same thing over here. We have a bull breakout. Gaps above those highs. A sell climax. One or more consecutive bear bars. We have a gap this close and that low. And then now we have a three bar bear breakout. Gap at this point between this close and that low or any of these lows. Another bear breakout. At any given moment, you look at the most recent close. The gap is between that close and the start of the bear breakout, the bar before the bear breakout began. And it's also a gap between the breakout and these prior higher lows. The bulls tried to reverse up here, but they could not close that gap. So that means this gap between this close and this low is a potential measuring gap for a measure move down. So down to here, breakout test, measure move down. Same thing here. Lots of gaps. This close and these lows. This close. We have a bi-climax and a pause. Another bi-climax and we have a reversal. Strong reversal down, testing the bottom of the bi-climax. Sometimes when you have a bi-climax or a series of bi-climaxes, you get an immediate reversal down. Once you have big up, big down, you have big confusion. The market usually goes sideways, at least for a few bars. This one bar pause, it's a one bar trading range. We got a strong rally, probably going to get at least a small second leg up. And that's all we got. And then we had seven bare bars. A reversal down. Equally strong to the bull breakout. This one bar final flag creates a micro double top. This high and that high. Even though they're not at the same level, it's a type of double top. Most reversals involve some kind of a trading range. Here, we had a bull trend, a bear breakout, and then a pullback, retracing at least a third of the sell-off. This is a lower high major trend reversal after a bi-climax top. Even though you can call it a B top, it still involved a small trading range. I would call it consecutive bi-climaxes or parabolic wedge, one, two, three. And then over here, this is a lower high major trend reversal. Bear trend, trading range, 20 or more bars. 50-50 chance, you'll get a bull breakout and a reversal up. 50-50 chance, you'll get a bear breakout, trend resolution down. Whenever you have a sell climax like this and then a big reversal up, you have big down, big up, creates big confusion, you're probably going to go sideways. Confusion is a hallmark of a trading range. The result usually is a trading range lasting 10 or more bars. You can get an immediate reversal up. You can get a double top and immediately sell off below this low for a measured move down. More likely, big down, big up, big confusion, you're going to go sideways at least for five or 10 bars. And here, the whole thing became a big trading range. Again, confusion is the hallmark of a trading range. So whenever you see something that makes you confused, you have to assume the market's in a trading range. Look to buy low, sell high and take quick profits. Scout. In this video, I talked about V-tops and bottoms, and I made the important point that V-tops and bottoms are almost always something else, and I therefore use some other term to describe what is taking place. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching The Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on climaxes. And let me tell you why we need a last camera back. All right. Let me...