 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of six videos on trading the Open. I want to talk about the market breaking out above yesterday's high or below yesterday's low and then reversing. That is a very common thing and it's a very common setup on the Open that leads to a swing trade. Sometimes the market will break above yesterday's high and reverse down, but the reversal fails and the breakout resumes and the market continues higher. That's a failed reversal of a breakout of yesterday's range. And the same can happen with the bottom. It can break below yesterday's low and then reverse up, but the reversal does not get far and then the bear trend resumes. Here are a couple of charts with breakouts. The blue line is yesterday's high. The market went above yesterday's high and reversed down, but below a bull bar. Most traders would not take that short. It went above yesterday's high again a second time and it reversed down again. And this time with the bear bar closing on its low. That is a good setup for a swing short. Traders sell with a stop, one tick below the low of that bear bar, looking for a swing down. A second entry of any trade has a higher probability of success. A bear bar closing on its low is a much better sell signal bar than the bull bar here. Therefore, it's a higher probability sell. A very important point is that there are many ways for these second entry trades to set up and you have to be open to anything. What you have to be focusing in on is a reversal and then a second reversal, no matter what it looks like. And you want the second one to have a good signal bar. This blue line is yesterday's low. The market traded below it and reversed up, but a bear bar, not a good buy signal bar, even though the market rallied pretty strongly. And then it broke below yesterday's low again here and reversed up again. And this time a decent looking bull bar, a bull bar closing on its high. That is a higher probability by buying on a stop above that high. Again, focus on the second reversal. And there are many ways that can happen. Sometimes the bars can be 10 bars apart, sometimes just two or three bars apart. Here's another strong rally on the open that breaks above yesterday's high. And it's a second entry short. Can you see what I mean by the second entry short here? The market went below the bear bar. That's a reasonable short, but with this many bull bars, most traders would want a second entry short. And then it rallied to a new high here and then reversed down a second time. The second entry is below the low of this bull bar or below the low of that bear bar. So micro double top. It went down below this bear bar and went up to a new high and then reversed down a second time. The second entry for the sell signal, breakout above yesterday's high. A bull bar, not ideal. A lot of traders prefer to sell below a bear bar, which would be right here. And the bear's got a couple of legs down. Micro double top, and therefore it's a type of low 2. The second high does not have to be above the first. Here it was. You're simply looking for a second entry, the first one failing, and then a second one forming. After the first couple of hours, the market reversed up from a wedge higher low. A gap up and a rally, and then a two-legged pullback to a wedge higher low. Three big bear bars. A lot of traders will not take the first reversal up. They'll take the second reversal up. Yesterday's high. The market tried to reverse down from below yesterday's high, but below a bull bar. Some traders would sell below the bear bar, but with the two bull bars here, a lot of traders would wait. The market resumed up a high two and went above the bull bar, and then above this bull bar after a gap up. Some bulls would buy that, but that big tail on the top of the buy signal bar would make a lot of traders hesitate. And then we got a bear bar here. First entry sell below a bull bar or below this big bear bar. And then this is a second entry for a failed breakout above yesterday's high. Reverse down for a failed breakout. And now we're getting a second entry failed breakout with a better looking sell signal bar. Yesterday's high, the market broke above it. It tried to reverse down here, but there was no stop entry sell. We're looking for stop entry sells. The first entry is below this bull bar. You could argue that there's a second entry below this bear bar, but with the doji and the prominent tails and the three bull bars here, a lot of traders would wait to see if they get a better sell signal bar, which they did here. So that would be a better sell. They put their stop above the high of the sell signal bar. And this high got exactly to that high and did not go above. Therefore, some traders would hold short, rely on their stops. Others would say, oh, we're breaking out above yesterday's high, and this is a two legged pullback one pullback two with a decent buy signal bar. And therefore, some traders who sold below here would exit above here. Other traders would buy above here hoping for the low of the day. When the market formed a double top here and turned down again below this bear bar or below this bigger bear bar, a lot of traders would sell. It's at that point a second entry sell, which is here. And then now you're getting another second entry sell here and a double top lower high. Double top lower high with good sell signal bars there and here. A reasonable short for a swing down. The traders are sold here. The traders are sold here. They could either put their stop just above the sell signal bar. It would not have been hit here. They could hold short or they can get out above the bull bar and then sell again. Once we have a double top triggering with the bear bar closing on its low. So they sell below that bar and get filled here. Take a look at this. Yesterday was a very small quiet day. Whenever yesterday is a small day like that, there's an increased chance that today will be an outside day. Either trade below yesterday's low and then above its high or trade above its high and then below its low. And today it did both. It traded above the high and then below yesterday's low and then back above yesterday's high again. We went above yesterday's high and reversed down below a doji. Not a very good sell signal. And then we're reversing down again, this time below a bear bar closing near its low. That's a higher probability sell. You could hold for a couple legs down. Most traders would get out above this bull bar. Other traders will hold, stop above the high of the sell signal bar and see if the market ultimately breaks to the downside. Which it did. This rally never went above the high of the sell signal bar and therefore never hit the stop. If traders did get out down here or for any reason, if they went long here, they're going to get out below this bear bar for a wedge. One, two, three reversals down or below this bear bar as well. Especially since it never went above the stop for that original sell. Parabolic wedge bottom. And a second entry buy for a failed breakout below yesterday's low. The market broke below yesterday's low, tried to reverse up. Doji bar, not particularly good. Especially after a strong sell it. And now the bulls get a second entry buy. With a good looking bull bar, this is a reasonable buy. You can also wait to buy the pullback. So strong reversal up and a pullback. This is a type of cup and handle bull flag right here. So we got a reversal and then a pullback. And that is by definition what a cup and handle pattern is. A cup and handle pattern is a reversal followed by a pullback. And that is a buy signal. A bull flag from this rally. The rally ultimately went back above yesterday's high. So an outside down day and an outside up day. Yesterday's low, we gapped down and we tried to reverse up above that bear bar and above this bull bar. Did not get very far. We sold off again and now we are trying to reverse up again. I would not buy above the bear bar. I prefer to buy above a bull bar like this bar. Or you could argue it looks like a tight trading range. Wait for a better buy. And here we have a bull bar closing on its high. At this point you can call it a triangle or a tight trading range or a third entry buy. But one with a pretty good bull bar, that is a pretty good buy. And we got a strong reversal up from there. If you do take that buy, stop is below the low of the day. Today opened up above yesterday's low and then sold off immediately and fell below yesterday's low. And reversed up above a bull bar. Tail on top, fairly prominent body. It is an okay buy. But a lot of traders would rather get a better looking buy or a second entry buy. Second entry buy was above this bear bar. Not great. Or above this bull bar. Better. So that is a higher probability buy. It is also a test of the low from two days ago. A perfect double bottom here. And a wedge sell off. A wedge bear channel. Wedge bear channel. Bull flag. You expect a bull breakout. And that makes all of this a higher probability buy. Especially above a strong bull bar like that. You could simply buy above this bull bar. But once you see this bull bar, the probability is high that we are going to have a swing up. Pull back to the moving average. And a wedge bull flag. Again, another cup and handle pattern. Where you have a reversal. And then a pull back to a bull flag. The reversal is the cup. And the bull flag is the handle. You could also call it a higher low major trend reversal. Which is what most cup and handle patterns are. A wedge rally. A lower high. Decent sell signal bar. Okay short later in the day for a scalp. A couple other trades. A double bottom. Pull back. A bull II. Reasonable buy. And then a lower high. A wedge rally. Bull bars bear. Bull bars bear. Bull bars bear. Bull bar. So third set of bull bars. And a reversal down. Strong sell off on the open. Below yesterday's low. We tried to reverse up here. It's a reversal up from below the trading range. But not from below yesterday's low. And then we sold off very strongly. Strong sell off like this. Probably will get at least a second leg down. Most bulls would not buy here. However, they would think about buying here. Even though it's a huge sell off. It's still a second entry for a failed breakout below yesterday's low. If you want you can call it a parabolic wedge. I would not really call it a parabolic wedge. I would not call this a parabolic wedge. I would simply call it a sell climax and then a consecutive sell climax. And then a pretty good looking bull bars. The price of a bull bar. about buying here. Even though it's a huge sell-off, it's still a second entry for a failed breakout below yesterday's low. If you want, you can call it a parabolic wedge. I would not really call this a parabolic wedge. I would simply call it a sell climax and then consecutive sell climax. And then a pretty good looking bull bar, especially since there's a micro double bottom. So a reasonable buy above that high, looking for a swing up. Whenever you get a reversal day like this and the sell-off initially is very big, here the sell-off is about the size of an average day's range. It's in fact bigger than yesterday's range. Whenever you have a very big sell-off and then a reversal, usually you do not get a bull trend day. Is this a bull trend day? I would call it a trading range day. We went down, we went up, and we did not get much above the open. And that's usually what happens when you get a reversal after a very big sell-off. If the sell-off is small and you get a reversal, then you can get a big bull trend day. But if you looked at this on the daily chart, it's a doji bar. Here's the open, there's the close. And for me, it's a trading range day, even though it trended up all day or most of the day. Big sell-off on the open when it's about the size of an average day's range. If you get a reversal, usually the market has a hard time getting much above the open, if it gets above the open at all. Market gapped below yesterday's low. Tried to reverse up here. We have a micro double bottom, but a doji bar and a bull doji bar here. A lot of traders would want a second entry buy above a better bull bar, which they got here. We went down big, up big, probable trading range. We went up big and down big, confusion, probably trading range. Strong enough reversal that bulls would try to get a higher low major trend reversal. So bear trend, bull breakout, higher low, and the market simply went sideways for several hours. The bears got trend resumption at the end of the day. We broke below yesterday's low and reversed up. Good looking bull bar. Broke lower and reversed up a second time. Some bulls would buy here, or they would wait to see if they could get a better setup. And here, we have a small higher low. Strong reversal up from a second entry for the failed breakout below yesterday's low. And now we're getting a decent buy signal bar here. So that would be another buy. And then we have a higher low major trend reversal here. So that would be another buy above that bull bar or above that inside bar. It's pretty common in the open that you have to take several trades before you get a swing. A lot of the bears would sell below this bear inside bar. And we have a wedge, bear flag at the moving average. So it's reasonable if you bought here to get out below this bear bar. And it's also reasonable to get short looking for a bear trend. And then the bulls have a higher low major trend reversal. If you want, you can call it a double bottom. Therefore, a lot of the bears who sold here would get out here. A lot of the bulls would buy here. The day ended up mostly sideways. There was a rally at the end of the day. Another double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. This higher low major trend reversal is bad. Four bear bars and then a bear inside bar here. Usually, that's going to be a minor reversal. And traders will look for a major reversal later in the day. And here, this is better. A double bottom, slightly higher low, with three bull bars closing on its high. So you buy above there or above here for a swing up at the end of the day. I said that sometimes the market will break out above yesterday's high and reverse down. And then the bulls buy the reversal and the bull breakout resumes. So there's a failed reversal of the breakout of yesterday's range. And the same can happen at the bottom. You can break low yesterday's low, try to reverse up. But that reversal attempt fails and the bear breakout resumes and the day becomes a bear trend. Every pattern can fail. And you should be aware of how a failure looks. We broke above yesterday's high, reversed down. And then we had a second reversal either here or here. However, we have a pretty good rally here and a lot of bull bars here. You have to be aware that this may not lead to a bear trend. Instead, it led to a trading range. And at some point, you have to decide that the sell is going to fail. Here we have four bull bars. Here we have six bars without a bear body. It looks like the sell is failing. A lot of the bears who took that sell would get out above this bull bar here, a second entry by holding above the moving average. And then at this point, this big bull bar represents everybody deciding that the market is going higher and that the sell is going to fail. The bears who took this short are disappointed that it immediately reversed up at the moving average and immediately reversed up again a second time with a good looking bull bar. Most of these bears would get out here and then the final bears gave up here. And the bulls are doing the opposite. They know the bears are giving up. The bulls are looking to buy to get long. This pullback stayed above that breakout point. This pullback stayed above that high. It's a small pullback bull trend day, which is a very strong trend day. A big buy climax at the end and then profit taking into the close. Bulls would buy all those little bull flags looking for another leg up. And at the end of the day, some bears would sell for a scalp down and the bulls would exit. This is a buy the close finish, probably starting a little bit too early, starting around noon. Normally, a buy the close finish has to start closer to 1230 if it's going to make it to the end of the day. If it starts too early, it usually reverses. The market was above yesterday's high, tried to reverse down, tried to reverse down a second time, but then it became a bull flag. This is a high two bull flag, especially above this bar. At some point, these bears have to decide to give up. If they enter short below that bear bar and immediately reverses up, they're going to be pretty quick to get out either above this bull bar closing above its high. Or above that bull bar. The bulls will buy this as a high two bull flag. So bull trend, the gap up is a bull trend and then a pullback and then a second entry buy above that bar. Ultimately, there was a wedge top and a second entry sell. First is below the bull bar, second below the bear inside bar, and the bear's got to swing down. The market gaped below yesterday's low and below the 20 bar exponential moving average on the 60 minute chart. So this is the 60 minute EMA. This is the five minute EMA. And I have a formula that allows me to plot the 60 minute EMA on the five minute chart. The market broke below yesterday's low and below the moving average and reversed up. A reasonable buy and then a higher low, reasonable buy. But then look at this. We sold off, we sold off. We're selling off at the moving average and around a 50% pullback of the sell off. Therefore, this is a reasonable sell signal as well. So the bears will short that. Bulls will buy this, they'll buy this. And then everybody shorts this, a wedge bear flag, 50% pullback at the moving average, opening reversal down from the moving average. Strong bear breakout immediately reversed up above a pretty good bull bar. Remember on the open, no matter how strong a leg up or down is, 50% chance it's going to fail and reverse. If you see a strong sell off like this and then a bull bar, especially bull inside bar closing near its high, you have to get out of shorts and it's a reasonable buy. This is a large double bottom. We went up, we went up again, a lower low double bottom, lower low major trend reversal. It's a large second entry buy. Here's the first entry buy, failed breakout yesterday's low. Here's the second entry buy, failed breakout yesterday's low. This is a five minute chart. And if you looked at a 15 minute chart, it would probably be a fairly simple looking second entry buy, failed breakout below yesterday's low. The bulls take the reversal up here and here. The bears sell the reversal down below that bear bar or a second entry short here. At this point, we have a lower low major trend reversal, pretty good rally and a higher low major trend reversal. A reasonable buy, a wedge higher low. One, two and three. Yesterday's high is important resistance. Yesterday's low is important support. If the market breaks above yesterday's high and reverses down, that's a reasonable sell, especially if you have a second entry sell. If it breaks below yesterday's low and reverses up, especially a second time, that's a reasonable buy for a swing up. However, sometimes when the market reverses up from below yesterday's low, it becomes a bear flag and the bear trend resumes. So you have to be aware that the reversal will not always work and you have to be prepared for the bear trend to resume and you have to get short again. And the opposite is true at the high. If the market breaks above yesterday's high and reverses down, but the reversal becomes a bull flag, you have to be prepared to get out of shorts and to look to get long. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of six videos on trading the open.