 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading in trading ranges. For the markets in our trading range, it often has two-legged moves up and down. Sometimes the second leg is especially strong and it looks like the trading range is breaking out into a trend. However, 80% of trading range breakout attempts fail and those strong second legs trap traders into buying high or selling low. They are second leg traps. Traders should be expecting breakouts to fail. They should be fading breakouts, betting that the breakouts will fail, looking for reversals. I'm going to talk about the ways to enter when the market is reversing down near the top of the range and reversing up near the bottom of the range. Traders often have to use fairly wide stops and if they are able to scale in, that increases the probability that they will be able to make money. This is a five-minute chart. It has probably 300 bars on it, 250, 300 bars. When you are trading, you are not going to be looking at this many bars. But I have it up like this to illustrate that the market has been in a trading range for a long time. I want to be able to demonstrate several things about the trading range and having this many bars on the screen allows me to do that. Trading ranges often have two-legged moves up and down. Sometimes three-legged moves, wedges. And often the patterns are nested within bigger patterns. For example, we have a wedge rally here, two legs down here, one pullback two. And then a rally here, which is just a second leg up. So leg one, pullback leg two. And you can see, leg one subdivided into either two or three legs. And lots of two-legged moves. One pullback two. One pullback two. One pullback two. One pullback two. One pullback two. One, this whole thing being one pullback two. One pullback two. And two subdivided into one pullback two. That's just normal trading range behavior. As I said, often legs subdivide into three pieces instead of two. Lots of little wedges. Lots of ways to draw the wedges. One, two, three. Wedge bull flag. When a breakout below a double bottom reverses up, you have three legs down. One, two, and then three. That's a variation of a wedge. And you can just see wedges all over the place. Three-legged moves. Many ways to draw them. Very common to have legs within trading ranges that are wedges. Traders should look to buy reversals up from wedge bottoms or from two legs down. Couple legs down. One pullback two. Near the bottom of a range. Buy the reversal up. Leg one. A, B, C pullback. And then two. So two legs down. Also a double bottom. Buy a reversal up. Small wedge bear flag. Pullback. Buy the reversal up. A wedge bull flag. Buy the reversal up. Reversed up. Reversed up. Reversed up. So three legs down. Three legs up. And then a second entry by here. Very tight channel wedge. We have a micro wedge here. Reversed up. Reversed up with that tail. And then a third leg here. Traders should also look to sell reversals down from two legs up or from wedge tops. Three legs up. Wedge rally. Three legs. One, two, three. It's also two legs. One, two. Two legs. One, two. A big three-legged pattern here. One, two, three. And it's also a big two-legged pattern here. One, two. And then two legs up. One, pullback two. And then here we got a double top. Or a double top here. And a break above the double top. You can call it a trading range with a double top. And a small wedge here. A second leg trap that is a strong second leg that looks like it's going to successfully break out into a trend. But it reverses instead of leading to a measured move. Beginners see a strong leg like this and they assume it's going to be the start of a trend. But then it simply reverses. It traps traders into buying high. And the same here. We have our first leg up. And then a very strong second leg up. Bulls are hoping this is the start of a bull trend. But look to the left. We're still possibly in a trading range or a broad bull channel. Second leg traps are also common in broad channels up and down. And then here is a small second leg trap. One, pullback two. Trying to break out. Bulls are hoping for a trend up. They're looking at this as a bull trend and a pullback to a double bottom. And it traps traders into buying high. Beginners see three, four consecutive bull bars. They start buying closes, betting that it's the start of a bull trend. They may even buy the highest close, hoping for a big bull breakout. And same up here. They'll be buying closes, hoping that the trading range is going to convert into a bull trend. And then they just get trapped into buying too high. Again, here. Hoping for the breakout. Beginners buy up here instead of down here. And same with up here. They're buying up here. They should be buying down here. Here, you don't know what the bars to the left look like. This might be part of a trading range. It's reasonable to buy closes here, here. Here, I would not. We have a micro double top. On this bar, we went up and down. And now we're going up again. And this is a very big bar. So I personally would not buy that close. Too much risk of a double top and a pullback. The opposite is true on sell-offs. Beginners see big bear bars, hoping that it's the start of a bear trend. And they end up selling bear closes. But you look to the left, we're still in the trading range. Selling low, even when there are big bear bars, is usually a bad thing to do. More likely, the bear breakout will reverse than it is to break to the downside and fall for a measured move. The bear sees four consecutive bear bars, big bear bar closing on his low. And he sells the close, hoping this is the start of a bear trend. Instead, an expert looks at it and says, Ah, a big bear bar at the bottom of a trading range. That's a buy, not a sell. Beginner sells breakouts below bars, hoping that it's the start of a bear trend. Not realizing that at the bottom of a trading range, 80% of breakouts will fail and reverse up. So he's doing the exact opposite of what he should be doing. Beginner bought too high and he sold too low. Beginner buying up here is shocked by how quickly the market reversed down and see how it's going. Reverse down and same here. He's shocked by how quickly and relentlessly it reversed up. Same with up here. But that's how trading ranges behave. Incidentally, if you get a very strong breakout like that, especially when there's a possible micro double top, this tail and this bar, and then you get a bear bar closing on its low, it's usually good to get out below that bear bar just in case this is a second leg trap. If you get a sell off, you wait to buy. If you simply go sideways, you can buy again above a bull bar and bet on a successful breakout. A lot of beginners, they'll buy here, they'll buy here, betting that it's either a bull leg leading to a bull trend or a bull leg in a trading range and that will fall near the bottom and resume up. And the beginner is right. But invariably, if he buys up here, he sells out down here and he may even reverse the short. And then he gets trapped in and he buys back his short way up here. He's doing the exact opposite of what he should be doing. When you can see the bars to the right, it's easy to say selling down here is dumb and buying up here is dumb. But real time, it's much harder to say that. And if you're a beginner and you're looking at the bars, you tend to be looking at the most recent bars and you're seeing bull trend and you're ignoring the bars to the left, which are telling you that it's either in a trading range or a broad bull channel and buying high in either case is a bad thing to do. Same with here. Traders only look at the most recent two or three bars and they buy too high. Here, especially, we're clearly in a trading range and beginners only look at this big bear bar and they see some other bear bars here and they ignore all of this, that the market's at the bottom of our trading range and it's a losing strategy to sell there. For the bulls buying up here, there's a possible expanding triangle. One, two, and now three. And we have consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows. If a trader did buy here or here, and if he did not get out below that bear bar, he really should get out on the close of the second bar. And at the bottom, expanding triangle tops usually lead to expanding triangle bottoms and that's what we had here. So rather than selling here, hoping for a successful breakout, it makes more sense to look to buy a reversal up. Another expanding triangle. We went high, we went higher and even higher still. Rather than buying up here, betting on a successful breakout, it makes more sense to wait to see if it reverses and then look to sell. Especially after you get three or four consecutive bear bars, traders, if they're long, will get out. If they're flat, aggressive traders will start selling at the market, selling at the close of the bear bars. Trading range. My 80% rule. 80% of breakout attempts will fail. And therefore it's better to bet that the breakouts will fail. And therefore instead of buying at the top when the market's breaking out of the top, it makes more sense to sell a reversal back down. And the opposite is true at the bottom. When you see a strong breakout attempt at the bottom, look to buy a reversal up. Leg one, pull back leg two. Leg one, pull back leg two. Expert traders know that an exhaustion gap is more likely than a measuring gap when the market's in a trading range. And therefore they're looking to sell a reversal down. In fact, an aggressive trader might even sell this big close because it's an exceptionally big bar. And we have a tail on the top of this bar. The bulls will see this as an opportunity to sell. We're trying to break above the top of a triangle. And we have a micro double top potentially. And aggressive bears would sell that. Most bears would wait for a bear bar closing at its low and then sell below it. Or wait for two or three bear bars and then start selling closes. Sell below a strong bear bar closing at its low. Sell the close of consecutive big bear bars, expecting at least a small second leg down. After three or four bars down, some traders will sell with limit orders at the high of the prior bar, betting on at least a small second leg down. This is really not an easy short. This rally is so strong, the odds are even if we pull back, we'll form a higher low. When you see a strong rally like this, the odds are it's either the beginning of a bull trend or it's a bull leg in a trading range. In which case, if it sells off even to the bottom or below, it'll come back up again. However, I'm illustrating this as a second leg trap. As I said, you don't know what the bars to the left look like. We might be in a trading range already to the left. And if we were, I would never be buying up here. Same with up here. We're clearly in a trading range here and a broad bull channel. And whenever I see a very strong second leg up, I assume it's more likely an exhaustive move than the start of a bull trend. Some traders will sell with a limit order at this high, especially since it's a micro double top. We went up, down, up. Others prefer to enter with stops. Beginners should only be entering with stops. And they'll either sell the low, one tick below the low of this bear bar, or they'll wait for three or four bear bars. And then they'll start to sell closes. Big reversal down, reversing this bull bar. Probably we'll have at least a little bit more down. So it's reasonable to sell the close of that bar as well. So after a few days of trading range of trades, we're looking to buy. And we're looking for a bull bar. Whenever an expert sees two strong legs down in a trading range, he's looking to buy. He's expecting it to be an exhaustion move instead of a measuring gap and leading to lower prices. The reversal up is more likely. Leg one, pull back leg two, big bear bar. If I'm trading this, I'm expecting this to be a bear trap, trapping beginners into selling at the bottom of a trading range, and I'm going to be looking to buy for a reversal up. You can buy with a limit order at that low, or you can buy a reversal up, especially above a bull bar, like above that bull bar, or a second entry buy. We went down, we went up, we went down, we went up. So buying above the high of that bear bar, actually, is a micro double bottom buy. And then a strong reversal up, big down, big up. Probably we'll get at least a little bit more up, so you can buy the close of that big bull bar. Very often, when you look at a chart, and you see a big bull bar, and you're thinking, boy, the market needs just one more of these big bull bars, and then everyone will conclude that the market's going higher. Whenever you see that, expert traders will sell the close, betting that you will not get that one more bull bar. Here we have a bull breakout and follow through, but it's more likely a trap, and therefore, bears will sell strong bull closes after the market rallies several bars, betting that instead of the start of a bull trend, we'll get a pullback. The opposite is true with sell-offs. Whenever you see a strong bear bar and you say, boy, I really hope we get one more bear bar. As soon as you're hoping for that one more bear bar, it's usually better to buy. If you're an experienced trader, you'll simply buy the close. Big bear bar, bears need a little bit more to convince traders they've taken control. Well, bulls will buy that bear close. The same with here. All of these bear bars. You can see how the follow-through is bad. Big bear bar followed by a bull bar. Bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, bad follow-through. That tells you that whenever there's a big bear bar, the bulls are overwhelming the bears and creating reversals. And the opposite is true with the big bull bars. Look at the follow-through after every breakout attempt. It's terrible. And that tells you that the bears are overwhelming the bulls at the top of each strong bull leg. I want to talk a little bit about how to enter on reversals. When you're in a trading range, a lot of times the first reversal from the bottom or the first reversal down from the top is not the final reversal. For example, we reversed up. We reversed up a second time here. We reversed up. Sold up. We reversed up a second time here. Most traders, if you see a strong leg down, it's usually better not to take the first reversal up. It's better to wait for a second reversal down. And the same is true at the top. Instead of taking the first reversal down, it's better to wait for a micro-double top and then take a second reversal down. The probability is higher. Trying to reverse up. Second reversal up here. Higher probability leading to a leg up. When you're trading within a trading range, it's better to be using wide stops, like maybe below here, planning to scale in lower. But you don't want to take a second entry unless it's at least two or three times the size of a scalp below the first entry. So if you're trading the E-mini and the minimum scalp is one point, you do not want to take a second entry buy unless the second entry is two or three points below the first. Therefore, if you take this buy, I would not take that buy. But if you did not take this buy, this is a reasonable second entry buy. The same is true at the top. If you're selling a reasonable top here, you can call it a wedge one, two, three, or one, two, three, a failed breakout above a high. If the leg up is strong, here five consecutive bull bars, it's often better to wait for a second entry sell. Here's the first entry. That's not very good. This is a better second entry sell, a small double top lower high. Did not get very far. We have a new high here, and that would be a second entry reversal for the breakout above this high. When the market's in a trading range, traders are going to look to buy reversals up in the lower half and sell reversals down in the upper half. This is the sell zone, and this is the buy zone. And beginners should only be looking to enter with stops. Buying with a stop on a reversal up from the bottom. Selling with a stop on a reversal down from the top. A stop entry, the market's going your way, and that has a slightly higher probability of making a profit. We're in the top half of the developing range. Traders can sell with a stop below the low of that bar. Better if the bar has a bare body, which this does. And it's better if it's a second leg up. One pullback two, and one pullback two. At this point, the trading range is bigger. This pullback is into the lower half. Traders will look to buy a reversal up, especially a second entry. The first entry is above this little bulldoji. This is a second entry. It has a higher probability of being profitable. When a first leg down is strong, the probability is not all that good that buying the first reversal up will be profitable. It's higher probability to wait for a second entry buy. Here, a micro double bottom. It went up and then down on that bear bar. And now it's going up again. The high of that bear bar is the neckline of this small double bottom. Traders will buy on a stop above the high of that bear bar. Other traders will buy above this bull bar, closing on its high. A bull inside bar. They'll buy on a stop above its high and get filled right there. When you have a very strong rally, it's usually better to wait for a second entry sell, like a micro double top, or for a strong bear breakout. The market went up and down on this bar. And then it went up on that little bull bar. And then down again. The low of this bull bar is the neckline of this small double top. We went up and down. We went up and down. We went up and we're going down again. So you can sell with a stop below the neckline of that micro double top. And you get filled right here as the bear bar falls below that bulldoji. We have a micro double top here up and then pause and then up again, but a very tight bull channel. Some traders will wait until there are three or four consecutive bear bars, especially if two or three of them close on their lows. And then when they see that, they'll simply hit sell the market when they see the close of that third or fourth bear bar. Big reversal down and a follow through bar. Most bulls are not going to buy the first reversal up. They might buy the second reversal up. But because most bulls won't buy the first reversal up, selling the close for a trade down is a reasonable thing to do. Trading ranges, you're never really certain if a reversal will work. The probabilities are not as high as you would like them to be. Because of that, experienced traders will use wide stops and scale in to increase their probability. If you buy here, reasonable to put a stop down here. We got a reversal up from a lower low. Two legs down, one pull back two. If you buy here, reasonable to put a stop here. Opposite is true up here. We have a micro double top. Reasonable to take that sell and put a stop just above. Here we have four bear bars, three or four bear bars. You sell there. Reasonable to put a stop above the top of that bear leg. I'm going to talk in later slides about how experienced traders trade these things. A lot of times they'll trade small, use wide stops and scale in. The trading range should never be scaling in and they should never be using wide stops. If they get stopped out, they can enter again on the second signal. If they get stopped out a second time, do not take the third signal. Just take a break for a little while and see what's going on. If your second entry fails, then you're probably doing the wrong thing. You're probably thinking the market's in a trading range and in fact the market may be a trend. Double top bear flag. Reasonable to sell with a stop below that little bear bar. You get filled here. Looking for a small trade down. Can you put your stop here or should you put your stop here? This is a major high. This is a minor high. This is a minor high. Both are okay. If a trader took this sell for this double top bear flag and he held for a swing down and he got stopped out by using a tight stop, he could sell again below a bear bar on the failed breakout. If a trader used a wide stop, he's not going to get stopped out. He would capture the swing down. He would not get out here. Tight stop, wide stop, it does not matter which you choose. Both are reasonable and as long as you use reasonable stops, if you take the same trade ten times with a tight stop, you'll have the same amount of profit as another trader who took the same trade ten times with a wide stop. The wide stop trader loses less often. In other words, he has a higher probability of making money. But when he does lose, his losses are bigger. If you get stopped up using a tight stop and the market reverses down again, you can always sell again. Another double top here or here. If you want, you can call it a triangle. Three legs up, one pullback, two pullback, three. Does not look like a triangle, but you can call it a triangle if you want. A horizontal trading range with three legs up. Let's say you're making money selling above highs. You sell at this high, you made money. It went above, it came down. You sell with a limit order at this high, you made a scalp. And let's say you sell with a limit order at this high. Instead of churning down, it went up. This is never a problem for beginners because beginners should not be selling with limit orders and scaling in. However, if you're an experienced trader, you know how to handle it. You sell at that high, you're going to use some kind of a measured move up and a wide stop and you look to sell more higher, expecting the market to come back below the breakout point. And that will allow you to get out break even on your first buy and with a profit with your higher entry. How high up should you put your stop? If you don't see any obvious nearby resistance, using a measured move up is reasonable. The bulls want this to be a breakout that leads to a measured move up. It's a trading range and therefore it's probably not going to be a breakout leading to a measured move up. And if you use a stop just above a measured move up, it's probably not going to get hit. This high went 4 ticks above that high. Minimum scalp is 4 ticks. A trader selling at this high might scale in 4 ticks above knowing that the breakout here went 4 ticks above. Maybe this one will only go 4 ticks above. This one went more than 4 ticks above. Maybe 8 ticks. I don't know. But in any case, bears are confident that if we do get above this high, it's probably not going much above the high before it pulls back below the breakout point. Instead of selling this high and selling more 4 ticks higher, many bears who sold at this high and got filled here will sell more on a reversal down below a bear bar as long as the second entry is at least the size of a scalp above the first. Usually I'll only take that stop entry sell if the second entry is at least 2 or 3 times the size of a minimum scalp, so 2 or 3 points higher. If you scale in either way, a lot of traders will get out break even at their first entry, which is at this high they sold right here, and then with a profit on their second higher entry. Bears are looking to sell above a prior high in the top half of the range. This is a very strong reversal up. If you see this forming, you're not going to be placing a limit order to sell at that high, because the odds are too great. This will be a double bottom or a wedge bull flag and the start of a bull trend. However, when you've got a strong rally like this and the context is good, wedge bull flag, double bottom, high or low, the probability favors higher prices. So it's usually not good to place a limit order to sell at this high when you see the market going up so quickly. We have a double bottom, a break below the double bottom, and a reversal up. Therefore, it's a type of a wedge bottom, failed break up below a double bottom. It's also a higher low. We don't know what the bars to the left look like, but let's say it was a bear trend. This would be a bull breakout and this would be a higher low major trend reversal. Let's say you wanted to bet on a second leg trap. You're betting that leg one is a wedge and that leg two will be a strong breakout attempt that will fail. And if you're willing to use a wide stop and trade small, you could place a limit order to sell at that high and you would get filled right here. For a stop, you want to use a stop a little bit more than a measured move up. This is a double bottom here or here. This is the neckline. Measured move up is here. And you put the stop just a little bit above. Thinking that the bulls are betting it's going to be a breakout in the start of a bull trend and that it will reach a measured move. You're betting that the rally will be a second leg trap in a trading range, in which case it should not reach the target that the bull trend traders need. You're betting it's a trading range, not a trend. A good way to scale in in a situation like this is wait for a bear bar closing on or near its low and then sell more on a stop just below its low. And then plan on getting out break even at the first entry price and then with a profit on your higher entry price. This is the end of the session did not get down to your first entry. It's reasonable to exit at the end of the session. You'd have a small loss here and a bigger profit here. The reason traders scale in is to increase the probability of making money or to reduce the size or the probability of losing. So if you enter a trade and it turns out to be bad and you do not want to exit with a loss, some traders will scale in to avoid the loss. Some traders, when they take an entry that they think is reasonable and then conclude that the trade is bad, they will scale in not to make a profit but to avoid a loss. A trader taking this sell, he might start thinking that maybe this is going to be a bull leg in a trading range instead of a second leg trap. He's therefore not so much thinking about making a profit as he is about trying to avoid a loss. Most traders never plan to let a wide stop get hit. And a lot of traders, when they see the breakout bar and a follow through bar, they'll just get out at the market knowing that a lot of other traders will buy at that close betting on at least a little bit more up. So you take your short here, you see a decent sized bull bar closing on its high, so a good breakout bar. And then the follow through bar, even though it has a big tail on top, it has a bull body. The odds are we're going up at least a little bit more. A lot of the bears who sold this high would just take the loss right here. Other traders would bet that the rally as strong as it is, is still more likely a bull leg in a trading range than the start of a bear trend. And they will therefore rely on their stop just above the measured move. This is a terrible situation for a scale-in trader. However, it was reasonable to take the short. And if a trader uses a wide stop and manages his trade appropriately, he has an 80% chance of getting out at least break even. In other words, avoiding a loss. The best way to avoid a loss in a trade like that is to look for a bear bar closing near its low, and then sell more below that bear bar. You have an 80% chance that the market is going to come at least midway between your first sell and your second sell. And that would allow you to get out break even on the trade. It might even come back to your first entry, and then you can get out break even on your first, and with a profit on your second. You could decide that the breakout is so strong, you're so disappointed, that you'll be happy just to get out break even. In which case, you sell here, you sell more on a stop below that bear bar. You exit break even at the midpoint between your two entries. A loss here, a profit here, and they cancel each other out. The alternative is to hold, just in case we reverse down below the breakout point here, allowing you to get out break even on your first entry, and with a profit on your second. Here, it did not quite get there, and you just exit at the end of the day with a small profit. A small loss here, a bigger win there. The reason why a lot of traders like to use wide stops is because it gives them time to make decisions, and it increases the probability of making a profit. The reason why you always have a stop in the market is because of black swans. If you lived in England a couple hundred years ago, every swan you saw was white, and you would assume that black swans do not exist. However, if you were a world traveler, you'd find out in New Zealand and Australia, there are a lot of black swans. So things that you think cannot happen, can happen. And because you do not think the market can break into a bull trend, that's not reason enough to hold forever. You always need a stop because this could do a low probability thing and just keep going up and up and up. And you need some stop to contain your loss. Now, is a trader going to let that stop get hit? Probably not. Most traders who use wide stops are using wide stops to give themselves time to make decisions and to manage the trade, to scale in, to avoid a loss. They're never going to let that stop get hit. Sometimes it will, but they're almost always going to get out before it's hit. And that stop is just to protect yourself against something unusual and unexpected. And you don't intend on letting it get hit. So let's say the market's going up here and you do not have a stop. And you get a phone call from somebody and you have to run out in an emergency for some medical problem. If you didn't have a stop and you didn't exit and you rushed out the door, the market could keep going up and you get a huge loss. Let's say your computer crashed or your electricity went out or your phone died or some other unexpected thing, or your broker is having a technical problem. You need some stop in the market to protect against very low probability events because those low probability events happen and they can cause huge losses. I began by talking about second leg traps. When the market's in a trading range, it often has a second leg up or down that looks especially strong. And it looks like the market is converting from a trading range into a trend. But my 80% rule, 80% of strong breakout attempts in trading ranges will fail. And therefore, you have a higher probability of making money betting that breakouts will fail, looking to buy a reversal up from the bottom or sell reversal down from the top. If a leg up is very strong, it's usually better to wait to enter on a second entry like a microdouble top. If a leg down is very strong, it's usually better to enter with a second entry buy, like a microdouble bottom. And beginners should be entering with stops. Experienced traders will often use wide stops and scale in and they'll often enter with limit orders. But that's only skilled, consistently profitable traders. Beginners should only enter with stops. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading in trading ranges. weights,ROX 대략yttics, on trading ranges and returns to the reached thousand targets. Sl actual and ranges up unable to double down its SQL provides for any local