 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on trading broad bear channels. I want to begin by defining what I mean by a broad bear channel. Channels are either broad or tight. And broad bear channels are not common on five minute charts because the average five minute chart has about 100 bars on the screen. And you usually will not notice a broad channel until it's had several hundred bars. Broad channels have major highs in them and minor highs in them. And the major highs are the important ones. As long as the bear trend is making a series of major lower highs, it's still a bear trend. Here are some bear channels. When the market is in a very tight bear channel, pullbacks are small and do not last many bars, very difficult to make money buying and therefore you should only look to sell. You can sell with limit orders, sell bull closes forming lower highs. You can sell below bars with stops. You can sell for any reason. But you have to be looking to sell. On the other hand, when a bear trend is forming lower highs, but the pullbacks are lasting many bars and there are many big bull bars within the pullbacks, you have to be selling because it's still a bear trend. However, a lot of traders will also buy reversals up from prior lows. Bulls are buying in a bear trend. They should only be scalping. Bears are selling in a broad bear channel, a bear trend, so they can swing or they can scalp. Broad channels have a lot of time in trading ranges and therefore a lot of traders prefer just to buy low, sell high and scalp. Whenever a market is in a trading range and you really cannot discern whether or not it's in a trend in addition to the trading range, traders will look to buy low, sell high and scalp. And if the legs up and down are big enough, they'll sometimes swing part of their position. You sell reversals down from rallies and you buy reversals up from sell offs. A broad bear channel is still a bear trend and therefore traders find it easier to make money selling rallies. So the risk of buying here with a stop down here versus selling here with a stop up here is about the same. But the probability is greater for the bears and the reward is greater as well because we're probably going below that low. Trading range has legs up and as legs down has legs up legs down. This is also a broad bull channel has a higher high and a higher low. But during most of the time here, it's simply a trading range. Whenever the markets in any kind of a broad channel, most of the bars are also in a trading range. Here we have a broad bear channel and most of the bars are also in trading ranges. Small trading ranges, sometimes nested inside of bigger trading ranges. This is a trading range attempt. Here's another trading range attempt and another one as well. And trading ranges often have strong swings up and down. Strong bull breakout, strong bull breakout, big bear reversal, big sell off down here. And they're often channels within trading ranges. We have a bear channel here with lower highs. We have a bull channel here with higher lows. Bear channel there and broad bull channel there. This is a five minute chart of the E-mini and you can see it begins in the upper left and it continues down to the lower right. And therefore it's a bear channel. But within the bear channel, there are legs up that sometimes have 20 or 30 bars and the market is sometimes always in long. And therefore there are times when it makes sense to be trading on the long side, even though it's a bear trend. Now this chart has several hundred bars on it. When I'm trading, I'm only looking at about a hundred bars. Therefore, I'm not going to be trading this. If I'm going to be trading all of these bars, I'm going to be trading them on some other timeframe chart where all of these add up to maybe a hundred bars. For example, here's a 30 minute chart. You could sell here and the market stayed in a relatively tight channel and you could hold short the entire time. If I'm trading these same bars here on the five minute chart, that's not how I'm going to trade it because there are times when the market is always in long. So I'm going to be buying and selling. I'm only going to be looking at a hundred bars at a time. For example, this is about a hundred bars. And during this hundred bars, there are times when I'm going to be buying and other times when I'm going to be selling. Whenever you're trading, you should only be looking at a hundred bars on the screen, maybe a hundred and fifty bars. And you trade the bars that are in front of you. However, to see a broad bare channel, you have to look at two or three hundred bars because you usually need at least three legs up and down to conclude that it's a broad bare channel. And several of the legs will have ten or twenty or more bars. And that means you often have to look at two to three hundred bars to see the broad bare channel. If your intention is to simply sell and hold short through all of these rallies, then you're not trading it on the five minute chart. You need to be trading it on the next higher timeframe chart. On the five minute chart, you're only going to be looking at a hundred bars. And you're not going to be holding short when the market becomes always in long. And you'll see this throughout all of the videos on broad channels. Many of the charts have three hundred bars, five hundred bars, or even a thousand bars. And I have to put that many bars on the screen to illustrate the broad channels up or down. However, that's not how I'm going to trade. I'm going to be trading a hundred bars at a time. And sometimes those hundred bars are up and I'll be buying as it's going up. If I want to be trading it as a broad bare channel, for example, selling and holding through all of these rallies, I'm not going to be looking at this chart. I'll be looking at some higher timeframe chart where the broad bare channel from the five minute chart is a tight bare channel. So I can sell and just hold all the way down. The market is in a bare trend. Begins in the upper left, goes to the lower right. And along the way, it's forming lower lows and lower highs. It's getting some higher highs. It's going above minor highs along the way, but it's forming a series of major lower highs. A major lower high is a high that is a very strong sell up, usually to a new low. For example, this is a major lower high. This is a major lower high. Broad channel. Most of the bars are also in one or more trading ranges. For example, if you only were looking at this part of the chart, you have a higher high here. You have a lower low here, expanding triangle, and then you have a higher low here. It looks like a trading range. It is a trading range, but it's also part of a broad bare channel. Another trading range. And within big trading ranges, there are usually smaller ranges. For example, here's a head and shoulders bottom within this bigger trading range. Whenever the market is in a section that looks like it's dominated by trading range price action, traders tend to trade it like a trading range and pay less attention to the broad bare channel. When the market's doing this, traders are buying low, selling high, scalping. Same with here, even though it's also still in a broad bare channel. When traders are trading, they're not looking at 300 bars like this. They're looking at 100 bars, day traders at least. And they're trading the day or the session in front of them. And they're not worrying about the sessions before or after. It's the same channel that I just showed you, but now I have it drawn as a line chart. And you can see it's a bare channel. A broad bare channel is simply a trading range that is tilted slightly down. You can see it's basically a trading range that has a little tilt to it. It has deep pullbacks. And the more it looks like a trading range, the more traders tend to trade it like a trading range. They ignore the minimum bare trend. In this particular case, before I tilted it to horizontal, it had a minimal slope going down. And most traders would rather trade it like a trading range, buy low, sell high, and scalp. If a broad bare channel is steeper down, they'll tend to swing trade more. Let me talk about some of the features that I look for when I'm deciding whether I should only sell or if I should both buy and sell. Unlike a tight bare channel, if you're starting to get pullbacks that last five or more bars, and a lot of the pullbacks last five or more bars, chances are the channel is going to be broad. Also, I look at the size of the pullbacks. An average scalp, the smallest scalp in the E-mini is one point. And if you're looking at a five minute chart and a lot of the pullbacks are averaging more than three times the size of a minimum scalp. In other words, three points or more, then the market is probably not in a strong bare trend. It's probably either in a trading range or a broad bare channel, in which case you can both buy and sell. I pay attention to the size of the bars and the size of the legs compared to the bars. In this particular swing, the average bar is maybe eight to ten ticks tall. And if the legs are two to three times the size of an average bar, the channel is probably broad rather than tight. And that means you can both buy and sell. Often when the market's in a broad bare trend, there are times that it's actually always in long. Here and here. It's still part of a broad bare trend, but there are times when it's always in long and it's easier to make money buying. Very strong rally, probably going to form a higher low and get a second leg up. But the highs are still below the major lower highs. And this is a strong bare rally in a broad bare channel. Pullbacks are often more than 50%, and sometimes they're close to 100% of the height of the prior sell-off. Here's a sell-off, and this pullback was well above 50% of the size of the sell-off. This pullback is almost totally retraced this leg down, yet it still formed a lower high and it led to a lower low. 76% pullback. And this is an 80% pullback, but it's still a lower high in a broad bare channel. Bears and bulls can make money using stop entries. Bears obviously can make money with stops and a broad bare channel because it's a bare trend. But a lot of times, bulls can make money buying reversals up from prior lows with good buy signal bars, especially if there's a micro double bottom. We went down, and we have a bull bar here, so we went up. We have another bear bar, so down again, and then another bull bar. So now we have a micro double bottom. Bulls will buy on a stop, and because the channel is broad, the legs up are high enough so that bulls can make money entering with stop orders. Usually, pullbacks overlap breakout points. For example, the market broke below this low, so this low is a breakout point, and here's the top of the pullback. That means this is a stairs pattern, and when the market is forming a stairs pattern, bulls can make money buying at and below prior lows. And when bulls can make bulls can make bulls can make bulls can make bulls can make bulls can make money in a bear trend. The bear trend is not all that strong. It's usually a broad bear channel. And a broad bear channel usually has a lot of trading range qualities to it, and it usually typically evolves into a trading range. Bulls will buy reversals up from breaking out below prior lows, break out to a new low, buy a reversal up, same thing here and here, and they can make money doing it. Broad bear channels tend to have a series of trading ranges, and the trading ranges tend to get lower and lower and lower. So it's a trading range and then a breakout and then another trading range and another breakout. In general, whenever the market's making a trading range, it's in breakout mode, 50% chance of a bull breakout, 50% chance of a successful bear breakout. However, if the market's in a broad bear channel, and you look at a higher timeframe chart, these trading ranges are bear flags and a bear trend. And therefore, if you only look at the five minute chart, chances are the trading range is going to get a bear breakout, even though you think it might be breakout mode and have the same probability for a bull breakout. It does not. If you look back at enough bars, you'll see that the trading range is within a broad bear channel. And that means the probability of a bear breakout is greater than the probability of a successful bull breakout. Here we have a negative gap. We have a pullback and it went above the breakout point. As long as the overlap is not too big, I still call it a negative gap and it still sometimes leads to a measured move down. This high and then the breakout point, this is a major lower high. This is a major attempt at a reversal up. Two important points usually lead to a third point, a measured move down. Even though this overlapped the breakout point by maybe a couple of points, it's not that much overlap. It reversed down quickly and it still led to a measured move down. So we have a high, a strong bear breakout, and then a pullback that failed at the breakout point and it fell for a lot of measured move down. Here, this is before we get the pullback. So certainly a measured move target for a failed breakout below this double bottom. Here's the measured move down. But then we get a pullback here and it's starting to reverse down. I'm starting to look again for another measured move down from the negative gap. Again, this is the measured move from a double top, this high or that high, or this high or that high, or from a failed breakout below double bottom. Here, here. Trading ranges typically have both double tops and double bottoms. And when there's a successful breakout, traders look for a measured move. When we have a series of trading ranges in a trend, so you have trending trading ranges and you get a bear breakout, there's a 60% chance that even if the breakout reaches the measured move target, it's going to test back at least a little bit above the bottom of the prior trading range, at least one tick above that low. Here we have a bear breakout below the trading range. Here we have a bear breakout below the trading range and it went well above the low of the trading range. Here we have a bear breakout below the trading range. This is a five minute chart. Whenever you have a fairly broad channel on a five minute chart, in other words, occurring in 50, 60, 70 bars, not 200, 300 bars, it's typically a wedge pattern. It's a fairly broad channel, pullback more than 50%. Bulls can make money with stops buying reversals up, pullback lasting a lot of bars, 10 bars. It's a broad bull channel. And when that happens, and it happens only within the course of a day, you don't have to look at several days to see the channel. It's usually going to be a wedge bottom and you usually get a wedge reversal. Traders will therefore expect a reversal and not for a continuation of the bear trend. Remember, if you're a day trader and here's the start of the day, by the time you believe it's a broad bear channel, you're somewhere down here, you're already forming a wedge and chances are there's not much left to the downside. Chances are we're going to get a reversal. Again, a broad bear channel, lower lows, lower highs, occurring all within one day. And usually you have to be expecting the day also to be either a wedge bottom or a trending trading range day. Here we try to get a wedge bottom, one, two and three did not get all that far and ended up more as a trending trading range day. Trading range here, breakout, trading range here, breakout, trading range here, breakout. And also a few other bars. You can draw it this way and this way or you can say this is a trading range breakout and a smaller range. Breakouts are brief and the trading ranges have a lot of bars. Traders will sell reversals down because we're in a bear trend, but because the rallies last a lot of bars, bulls will buy reversals up at least for a scalp. We're forming lower highs and lower lows so it's a bear trend. Easier to make money looking to sell, but the pullbacks are big enough so bulls will also buy for a scalp. By the time a trader is confident that it's a broad bear channel, the day is almost over and there's not much time left for a swing down. Why are broad bear channels not all that common on five minute charts? Here are several days of a five minute chart. Each day is 81 bars, so this is over 200 bars. Usually you cannot be sure that the market's in a broad bear channel until there are at least 100 bars. And that is because a broad bear channel has bull legs that last a lot of bars. And by the time you get a couple of bull legs lasting 10 or 20 bars and then you add in the bear legs, you end up with more than 100 bars. More than what you would see in a five minute chart on the screen. Usually to become confident that the market is in a broad bear channel, you need at least three legs up and down. And since the legs each have 10 bars, sometimes 20 or 30 bars, you do not have enough bars in a 100 bar screenshot for you to be confident that the channel is broad. Therefore, if you're trading a five minute chart and you're only looking at today's price action, you're going to overlook broad bear channels. You'll simply trade what's in front of you. Even though today's price action might be part of a broad bear channel that has gone on for five or 10 days. If you want to be trading it like a broad bear channel, it's probably better to be trading a higher timeframe chart so that you can see the broad bear channel. We're having a series of lower highs and lower lows and we have a strong breakout to new low. Maybe this is a broad bear channel at the end of a third day in a channel going down. Usually you need at least three legs to be sure that you're in a broad bear channel. So one pullback two pullback three, but it's also possibly a wedge bottom. We could get a reversal up from here. Not enough information to be sure what to expect for tomorrow. And therefore the probability is not as high as the bears want. However, when you look back from this point here, you know in hindsight that this in fact was part of a broad bear channel. Again, if you're going to be trading a five minute chart like a broad bear channel, you really should be trading a higher timeframe chart. If you're trading the five minute chart, just look at the hundred bars in front of you and trade what is in front of you. If you want to be trading a chart that goes back five days or 10 days, you probably should not be trading the five minute chart. You should be looking at the 15 minute or 60 minute chart. The legs up and down in a broad channel sometimes last 10 bars, 20 bars or more. And since you need several legs to be convinced it's a broad bear channel, it often is impossible to draw that conclusion simply by looking at today's price action. You usually have to look at several days. If you're a day trader, you trade the hundred bars that are in front of you. While it's nice to know that the market's in a broad bear channel and it has been in one for the past several days, and it makes you look more for shorts selling rallies, you don't need to know that as a day trader. You simply trade what's in front of you. Broad channels are much more common on higher timeframe charts, 60 minute charts, daily charts, weekly and monthly charts. You can also see them on five minute charts, but you usually have to look at several days before they're clear. Usually you have to look at three, four or five days. Here it's nine days in a broad bear channel. And you're probably not confident that it's a broad bear channel until at least the third day. By definition, a broad bear channel is going to have strong rallies and sometimes the market's even always in long. You get strong breakouts, two legs up. Strong sell off and a bull breakout above the bear trend line and double bottom, higher, low, major trend reversal. And you can sell that looking for a swing down and you get out at the end of the day if you're a day trader. If you're a day trader, you can sell that looking for a swing down and you get out at the end of the day if you're a day trader. Here's a five minute broad bear channel that lasted six days. Nobody's going to be trading a chart that looks like this. This is basically a line chart. It's a bar chart. It's a bar chart. It's a bar chart. It's a bar chart. It's so compressed that it looks like a line chart. Most day traders don't trade charts that look like this. If a day trader wants to be looking at three, four, five days or more, he's not going to look at a five minute chart. He's going to look at a higher timeframe chart, a 15 minute chart, a 60 minute chart and trade that chart. If you're looking at a five minute chart, you're not going to look at it compressed like this and trade it like this. This is not the kind of chart that most traders are going to use for trading. I said that if you have a broad channel on a five minute chart, it can in fact be a very tight channel on a 60 minute chart. I talked about the nine day channel on the last chart. Well, this is it on the 60 minute chart. And for most of it, it's fairly tight channel. And when a channel looks like this, it's usually better only to look to sell. Triangle, bear bar, sell the breakout below. Strong follow through bar, you can even sell the close and put a stop above the top of the most recent bear breakout. Trail stops after each strong breakout to new low. This becomes a major lower high. You can put your stop just above its high. And then once this reverses down to a new low, and if there are a reasonable number of bear bars, this is then a new leg down and traders will put their stop just above the top of the leg. This then becomes a major lower high. And if you're trading the 60 minute chart, you're probably holding for several days and you can continue to hold until there's a clear bottom or until it rallies back above one of your stops. There's an important difference between major highs and lower highs. If the market's in a bear trend, it needs to keep forming more major lower highs. If it goes above a major lower high, then it's no longer in a bear trend. It's either in a bull trend or a trading range. And therefore you trade differently from how you would trade if the market was in a bear trend. Lots of reversals. Some are major, some are minor. Lots of little moves up and down. Strong sell to a new low. And therefore this is a major lower high up here. As long as the market continues to form major lower highs and does not rally above a major lower high, then it's still in a bear trend and traders will trade it like a bear trend. They'll sell rallies, maybe take profits at new lows. And they don't want to be buying high. If the market were to go above a major lower high, then it would no longer be a bear trend. It would either be a bull trend or a trading range. And therefore major lower highs are important. That's why I call them major. After each strong breakout to a new low, the most recent high then is a major lower high. And the bear trend needs to stay below prior major lower highs to still be a bear trend. Nine days in a broad bear channel. There are dozens of major lower highs and major higher lows throughout the channel. A minor lower high means just that. It's minor. If the market goes above it, then you still can be in a bear trend. They expect the reversal up to fail and for the bear trend to resume. Broad channels always contain trading ranges. Trading ranges often have bull legs that go above some prior highs. But as long as the highs are minor, then yes, it's a trading range, but it's still also in a broad bear channel. The bulls have to rally above major lower highs to make traders believe it's no longer in a bear trend. We broke out strongly above this high. But the sell off is not all that strong. Plus it did not make a new low. So it's a relatively minor lower high. It's a strong rally here. So it's a fairly good lower high, but it's not nearly as important as this. And here, same thing. We have a sell off reasonably strong, but did not get anywhere near the prior low. And therefore it's not really a major lower high. And if the market goes above it, traders will sell. At this point, is it in a bull trend or still a bear trend? Well, it's both. It's in a trading range. And whenever the market's in a trading range, it's always also in a bull trend and a bear trend. Here we're getting higher highs and higher lows. So it's a bull trend. However, we're still staying below a major lower high. So even with this rally lasting a couple of days, it's still a bull leg in a bear trend. Even if it went above this high, a major lower high, but did not get above the top of the bear trend, some traders would still look at it as either a trading range or a bear channel. We could go all the way up here and then collapse in a much bigger broad bear channel. Markets very often are simultaneously in a trading range, a bull trend, and a bear trend. And you don't know what the end result will be until you see what the bars to the right of the screen look like. Here we're in a broad bull channel. We're in a broad bear channel. And we're also in a trading range. That is very common to have all three existing at the same time. If the market just kept going up and up and up, you would say the bull trend began here. So this is part of a bull trend. If the market keeps going down, down, and down, you would say that this is a bull leg in a bear trend. So at this point, anywhere in here, the market is in a bull trend. It is in a bear trend, and it is in a trading range. It is a bear channel, still below a major lower high. Traders will sell reversals down from above prior highs, betting that each prior high is minor. And the breakout will lead to simply a bigger pullback in the bear trend. When the market's in a trading range, even if the trading range is within a broad bull channel, if you're trading the five-minute chart, you trade what is in front of you. And if it's in a trading range, you buy low, you sell high, and you take quick profits. You scalp. You spend a little bit of a bull trend, but it's not a bull trend. Strong bear breakouts along the way. The market's clearly always in short. Traders should be looking to sell. A bull trend lasting 10 or more bars. This bull trend lasted well over 100 bars, 150 bars. Bulls will buy for a swing. Double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. Another double bottom here. And I'll just get a look at this. Here are the first six days of that nine-day broad bear channel. And when you look at the individual days, it's hard to imagine that they are part of a broad bear channel, but they are. Broad bear channels often have strong rallies within them. Here the market was up almost all day long, but it was a bull leg in a broad bear channel and it formed a lower high. Pretty good reversal up, good bull bars. It's always in long. Traders will buy even though it's a bull leg in a broad bear channel. This day had lower highs and lower lows and it was in a broad bear channel and the pullbacks overlap the breakout points. Bulls could make money buying. They didn't know this may have been the low of the day and it could have lasted all day long from this point. So bulls will buy and they're able to make money buying. Again, this is part of what turned out to be a broad bear channel. Wedge bottom, three reversals up. One, two, and trying to get three and a micro double bottom. Bulls will buy even though it's a broad bear channel and it's part of a bigger broad bear channel. This is going to be a breakout. Traders are selling closes. And then we've got a fairly tight bull channel and bulls will buy for any reason. They'll buy closes, they'll buy above bars. This is a tight bull channel and a reversal day, a bull reversal day inside of a broad bear channel. And then it entered a trading range from here to the remainder of the day. And traders look to buy low and sell high and scalp. Strong bear breakout. Traders will sell. And then enter a trading range. Traders will buy low, sell high and scalp. It's a strong bull breakout and traders will buy, betting that we're going to get a swing up. Now we have a double bottom. They'll buy again. Tight bear channel. Traders are selling for any reason. And then enter the trading range. Traders buy low, sell high and scalp. A trading range for the first half of this day. Buy low, sell high. We have a higher low, maybe higher low, major trend reversal. And we're in a bull channel. Not all that broad, but it's still a bull channel. Traders will look to buy pullbacks. And this is a bull channel inside of a nine day broad bear channel. So if you're day trading and you're looking at the five minute chart, you pay much more attention to the bars in front of you. And you don't worry that these bars are part of a much bigger broad bear channel. Look at these days. None of them look like they're part of a broad bear channel. And you only see them if you look at several hundred bars on the chart. If you're day trading, you're not going to do that. You're going to focus on the hundred bars that are in front of you and trade what you see. And that includes buying, even though it turned out to be a bull leg in a bear channel lasting several days. I began by drawing the distinction between a broad channel and a tight channel. When the channel is broad, you can make money both buying and selling. And since it's a bear trend, it's usually better to focus on selling. You usually cannot tell if a channel is broad until you've seen a hundred or more bars, 200 bars. And that's more bars than what you see if you're day trading on a five minute chart. Most of the time, if you're looking at a five minute chart, you cannot tell that the market's in a broad bear channel. And by the time you decide that it's in a broad bear channel, you're probably near the end of the day. There's an important difference between major and minor highs in a bear trend. As long as the market is making major highs, it's still in the bear trend. And therefore, if it goes above minor highs, traders will sell above those highs, betting that the market will continue to make major lower highs. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on trading broad bear channels. So, here are you.