 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on reversals. I'll begin by defining what I mean by a reversal. And next I will distinguish between a minor reversal, which leads to a trading range, and a major reversal, which leads to an opposite trend. And I'll make the point that reversals begin with breakouts. Even if the breakout is small, there's almost always a breakout at the start of a reversal. We have a bull trend and then a bear trend. The bull trend reversed into a bear trend. And we have a bear trend that reversed into a bull trend. A reversal at the top, a reversal at the bottom. A bull trend and a bear trend are opposites. And when one changes to the other, the trend is reversing from up to down, and then from down to up. Remember, all markets are either always in a trend or a trading range. And a change from one type of market behavior to another is a reversal. For example, a bull trend that becomes a trading range is also a type of reversal, although most people do not usually use the term reversal. We have a trading range and then a bull breakout. It's a breakout, and that's the term that I typically use, although you can argue that it's also a reversal because it's going from one type of market behavior to another type of market behavior. A bull trend became a trading range. Traders often call that a consolidation or a pullback. It begins as a pullback, but once it grows to 20 or more bars, the odds of a bull breakout fall to the same as the odds of a bear breakout. And instead of calling it a pullback, I use the term trading range. Trading range means the probability of a bull breakout is the same as the probability of a bear breakout. Early on, when you begin to pull back, the probability favors that the trend will resume. But as more bars get added, the probability becomes more and more equal for the bulls and for the bears. Every change in the direction of the market, every change in the behavior of the market is a reversal. We have a small trading range up here. And most reversals involve some kind of a trading range. Normally a bull trend does not go from a bull trend to a bear trend without first at least going into a trading range briefly. A bear trend usually does not go into a bull trend without at least becoming some kind of a small trading range. Here we have a small double top and a bigger double top and a bear reversal bar. And we've got the reversal. Here we have a small double bottom and a decent bull bar and a reversal up. This is the euro versus the dollar, a five minute chart. The market's constantly trying to reverse. Every few bars, there's a reversal attempt. We have a bear breakout and bad follow through. The bulls are trying to reverse the bear breakout. The bulls did not get much of a reversal here. But this is the reversal, occurring 19 bars after the bear breakout. It's a two bar reversal, down on this bar, up on that bar, separated by 19 bars. But this is the reversal. You can call it a bull reversal. You can call it a reversal. It doesn't matter what you call it. The market was trying to go down and now it's clearly going up. It's a reversal. It's a reversal. The market's rallying strongly here and then another leg up. But then look at this. This bar totally reversed that bar. It's a small reversal. On a higher timeframe chart, like a 10 minute chart, this would be simply a doji bar. It would look something like this. It's a reversal. However, it did not lead to an opposite trend. It simply led to a trading range. This bar is a small bull bar and it's followed by a bear bar about equally big. This is a small reversal within a very tight trading range. Meaningless, probably simply going to go sideways more instead of breaking to the upside or the downside. Every tail on every bar is a reversal. The market tried to go up and then it went down. The market went down and then it went up. All of these tails are reversals. The market went up and then down, up and then down, up and then down. Here's a two bar reversal and it's simply a doji bar or a tail on a higher timeframe chart. The market went up and then it went down. This is a reversal and on a higher timeframe chart, like a 60 minute chart, this would simply be a doji bar, a bear reversal bar. Up and then down. This would simply be a bar that opens over here, closes over here and has a big tail on top up here. This is a tick chart based upon one tick. This is one tick down and then we went sideways for a tick and then we went up for a tick, sideways for a tick, down for a tick. We traded here and the very next trade took place down here. The trade after that took place up here. This is a reversal. Even though it's only on a tick chart and it would be invisible on a higher timeframe chart, it is a reversal. The market traded down. The next trade, it traded up. The trade after that, it traded down again. It went up and went down. It's a reversal. Even though it's only two trades, up and then down. And it took place probably in a fraction of a second. It's still a reversal. Any change of direction is a reversal. This is the euro versus the dollar. This is a one tick chart. The market went up a tick and went up another tick and then down and up and then down. This is a reversal. The market went up and then it went down. The market was trading at this price and the very next trade took place here. And then the very next trade took place here. We reverse up here. We reverse down here. Even though it's only a tenth of a pip. If you look at the prices, it's only a tenth of a pip. The market went up a tenth of a pip and then it went down a tenth of a pip. It reversed from up to down and then repeatedly reversed through here. But every one of these changes in direction is a reversal. I want to distinguish between minor and major trend reversals. I think it's very important. A minor trend reversal, for example, a bull reversal and a bear trend usually becomes a bear flag. We have a bear trend and we are reversing. Can this be the start of a bull trend? Not likely. When the bear channel is tight like this, usually the first reversal up becomes either a bear flag, which this was, or it becomes part of a trading range. A major reversal requires more bars. A major reversal means the market goes from a bear trend into a bull trend. That's a big change. It usually requires more bars, 10 bars or so. This reversal in a very tight bear channel is likely to fail, so traders are ready to sell a failed reversal. They look to sell on a stop below the low of a bar, preferably a bear bar, betting that the bear trend will resume. A small double top bear flag with a bear bar. The reversal up, not very strong. Probably a bear flag. A good reversal up from a higher low major trend reversal. Bear trend, break above the trend line. And then we have a double bottom, higher low, with a good bull buy signal bar. And a good breakout bar, closing above the high of the past 15, 20 bars. And a follow through bar. The bulls have one. The bears are trying to reverse back down, but probably only a minor reversal, which means either a trading range or a bull flag. Probably going to go at least a little bit higher. You look to buy a reversal up, especially above a bull bar. Either here, get long here, or above this bull bar and get long here. This again is a major trend reversal. We have a bear trend, a break above the trend line, and the entire pattern has about 10 or 15 bars in it. Up 6 or 7 bars, down 6 or 7 bars. Big enough pattern to expect 6 or 7 or 10 bars up, a major reversal. This is a higher low major trend reversal. This low is taking place above the low of the bear trend, and therefore it's a higher low reversal. It has enough bars for it to be major. So traders can expect 5, 10, 20 bars up. It's also a double bottom. So it's a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. Again, minor reversals usually lead to trading ranges or flags and not opposite trends. But sometimes a trading range can contain a major reversal. Here, a minor reversal, a very tight channel. Probably the best the bulls get is either a bear flag or a trading range. And in this case, they've got a trading range. Some traders will hold for part of the position. Since a bear flag or a trading range is likely, traders scalp most or all of the position. Some might hold part of the position in case the trading range forms a major trend reversal and you get a trend up, a bull trend. Here we've got a bull trend lasting about 30 bars and a slight lower high. But the entire pattern here is only 4 or 5 bars. It's probably going to be a minor reversal, which means either a bull flag or a trading range. Traders will sell for a scalp for sure. And some might hold for a swing, hoping that we get a trend back down to here or to here. I want to say something about noise. It's a term you often hear when people are talking about trading. Noise is simply a minor reversal. For example, we have a bear trend. We're trying to reverse, trying to reverse. A trader who's swing trading will ignore minor reversals. And sometimes someone will say, oh, that's just noise. Also, when a tight trading range from the market is making multiple reversals, some traders will ignore them and refer to them as noise. My definition of noise is simply something that is so small that you will ignore it. And I never use the term noise. I use the term minor reversal. Because noise implies something is random. Something is happening that is purely random. And nothing can be random. Everything that takes place, it takes place because computers are making it happen. Everything is done because of logic. Just because something is happening and it's so small that you're choosing to ignore it, does not mean it is random. It's real and it's taking place for very good reasons. The computers are placing trades because they see logical trades, even though the trades are so small that you would never consider taking them. Some minor reversals are big enough for scalpers to take, not simply the computers trading for one or two ticks or one or two pips. However, they still are minor. And because of scalpers taking them and making money from them, they cannot be random. You cannot make money from random moves. You can only make money from logic. And therefore, noise cannot exist. Whenever you hear a person talk about noise, I think they're being ignorant. They're implying that they're either not understanding why the market is doing what it's doing, or they're simply choosing to ignore what it's doing. Ignoring what it's doing is acceptable. If the timeframe of the movement is so small that you're choosing not to trade it, that is fine. But to call it noise and believe that it's random is foolish. That's ignorant. Because everything that happens, happens for a reason. My definition of noise, minor reversal. And I prefer to use the term minor reversal. I want to talk a little bit here about a swing trade from a bear trend to a bull trend. When the market's in a bear trend, traders assume that every reversal attempt will be minor, which means it'll become a bear flag or a trading range. And they continue to do that until they see a minor reversal that is especially strong. For example, if it breaks above the bear trend line and rallies for 10 bars or so, or even goes sideways for 10 bars or so, that is a sign that the bulls are becoming stronger and the bears are becoming weaker. This is still a minor reversal, but it's warning traders that the trend might be near an end and it could convert either into a trading range or a bull trend. Once the bear trend resumes from this minor reversal, traders suspect that the next reversal attempt might be more than a minor reversal. And in fact, it might become a major trend reversal. In general, when you have a major trend reversal setup, you have about a 40% chance that the reversal will in fact lead to an opposite trend. 60% chance either the market stays sideways or the bear trend resumes. Here we have a higher low major trend reversal. A minor reversal that's fairly strong. It broke above the bear channel. And now the bear trend is resuming. Traders will be ready for another reversal attempt. And there's an increased probability that this reversal attempt would in fact be major. We have a couple of legs down. We have a double bottom with this low, slightly higher low double bottom. And a decent buy signal bar. Swing traders will buy above the high of this bar and get filled here, betting that there's a 40% chance we'll get a major reversal and at least a couple of legs up for a swing trade. Let me talk about the opposite. Let me talk about a bull trend reversing possibly into a bear trend. When the market's in a bull trend, traders assume that every reversal attempt will be minor, which means either you get a trading range or a bull flag and the bull trend will resume. However, if you get a strong enough minor reversal to break below the bull channel, below the bull trend line, especially if it lasts 10 or more bars, traders will wonder if the bull trend might be ending and either converting into a trading range or into a bear trend. And therefore, traders will look to sell the next reversal down, betting that maybe it'll become a major reversal into an opposite trend, a reversal from a bull trend into a bear trend. In general, 40% chance. Here, the bears are trying to get a lower high major trend reversal, a second entry short. The first attempt is below here. Most traders would not short that. And now we have a second attempt at a lower high. Traders would either sell there or below this bear bar. My concern about this as a major trend reversal is that the sell-off lasted only five bars. And that's usually not enough to lead to a major reversal. It might. The rally was weak and the pullback from the high lasted 10 or 15 bars. Maybe there's a 40% chance this would result in a major trend reversal. Instead, it just resulted in a second leg down and then a larger minor reversal. A minor reversal that had two legs down, one pullback, two, into a large bull flag. And then the bull trend resumed. However, at this point, the pullback from the high lasted about 30 bars. And that is a lot of bars. And that is a lot of time when the bulls were no longer in control. The market was balanced. Traders are aware of that, that this is a very big minor reversal. Therefore, if the bull trend resumes and tries to reverse again, there's a better chance for a major trend reversal down. They'll look to sell. This breakout is strong enough so that the odds are there'll be at least a small second leg up. After that second leg up, traders will look to sell a slightly higher high major trend reversal. This is a reasonable swing short, or you could sell below this bar, low two short, low one below here, low two here. And then a pullback from this bear breakout, consecutive bear bars. The odds are we're going at least a little bit lower. Again, 40% probability of a swing down, which means at least a couple legs. Usually when a swing trader is looking for a swing short after a major trend reversal, he's expecting at least a couple of legs down. And he's also expecting the reversal down to last 20 or more bars and lead to a reward that is more than twice the actual risk. Here it's many times greater than the actual risk. A swing trade, a bear trend to a bull trend, a bull trend to a bear trend, or a breakout of a trading range. Here we have a trading range and a bull breakout. This is a potential swing trade for a couple of legs up at a minimum objective. We have a breakout bar closing above the high of the past 20 or 30 bars. High probability of going at least a little higher. And then the follow through bar, the bar after the breakout bar, also closed with a bull body. And it closed on its high. And it closed above the high of the breakout bar. And the open of the follow through bar is above the close of the breakout bar. That tells you that as soon as this bar closed, a lot of traders hit the button, buy the market. So we had many traders trying to buy the market as soon as this bar closed. The open of this bar then is above the close of this bar. And that's a sign of very eager buyers. And it increases the chances of some kind of a measured move up and two legs up. First leg pull back, second leg. We got a third leg up as well. Almost all reversals begin with breakouts. Although the breakouts are not always obvious. Sometimes they're small. A reversal is a type of a breakout. We tried to resume the bear trend down. We have a bear trend and a couple of legs up. One pull back two. And now the bears are trying to get a downside breakout. Instead, it reversed up here and then especially here. This totally reversed the bear breakout. And every reversal is a type of a breakout. Remember, every bear trend bar is a breakout and it's a sell climax. Every bull trend bar is also a breakout and it's a buy climax. We have a big bull trend bar. It's a breakout. And it could be the start of a bull trend or a bull swing at least. All reversals begin with at least a small breakout. This is a bull breakout. You can say it's a bull breakout above a trend line. It's a bull breakout above a trading range. It's a bull breakout above the bear breakout. The bears gave up. The bears who sold here, hoping for trend resumption down, bought back their shorts. The bulls became confident that this is a higher low major trend reversal and we would get at least a second leg up. Once they saw the breakout bar and the follow through bar, they assumed that this was the first leg up and that traders would buy the first reversal down and expect one more leg up. This is a give up bar. The bears are giving up. The bears are sold, are disappointed by this bull bar. They hoped that we would resume down and when it started to go up, the bears bore back the shorts for a loss and they gave up on this bar. Every trend is in a channel, so every reversal breaks out of a channel. We have a reversal up. There has to be a channel somewhere. There are many ways to draw it. One is using this reversal down and this reversal down. You can create a parallel and connect it and make it a best fit. This is then an outlier. However, it's a bear channel and this is a bull breakout. We have a bull reversal, so you know it has to be breaking out of a channel. Whenever there's a breakout, whenever there's a big trend bar, especially when there's follow through, traders agree that the price is wrong and it has to move quickly to find a new fair price. It doesn't matter if you're talking about a breakout or a reversal, you trade them the same. Is this a bull breakout above a trading range? Is it a bull breakout above a bear channel? Is it a reversal up from this bear trend? It doesn't matter what you call it. The market's going higher. It's all of those. It's a breakout and a reversal. A big bear trend bar closing on its low. The bulls tried to bottom here and instead we got a bear breakout. This means that the price is too high and the market has to go lower to find buyers. It's a breakout. We're going lower. This is a reversal. It's also a breakout. We're going higher. Price is too low. Price is too high. A bear trend is a bear channel and there are lower highs and lower lows. For the bear trend to become a bull trend, it has to break above the bear channel and then it has to start to create a series of higher lows. We have a low. We have a slightly higher low, a slightly higher low and a bull breakout. This looks like it could be the start of a bull trend. In fact, it was. We have a bear channel and once there's a break up above the bear channel, traders will look to see if the market tries to resume down and fails and reverses up. And if so, in this case we've got a higher low, major trend reversal. The bulls are looking for a reversal up after an attempt to resume the trend down fails. The bears try and resume the trend down. Instead, we've got a big bull trend bar. The bears are trapped into a losing trade and the bulls are happy thinking that they've caught the beginning of a rally that will have at least two legs up. One pull back two. Bear breakout, but bad follow through for the bears. Bulls will buy above the high of this bar, taking a chance that it's a higher low, major trend reversal. And they want it to be the first of many higher lows. And the start of a bull trend. In both cases, the market's going down. It clearly believes that the price is too high and it has to move down for a little bit. And it has to move down fast to find a new fair price. Does it matter if one is a reversal and one's a breakout from a trading range? It doesn't matter. You trade them the same. The market's telling you that the price is too high. We have a trading range and a bear breakout. You're going to sell it. Because the market's going down fast, it's probably going lower. In this case, we have a bull trend that reversed down. You trade it exactly the same as you trade this. The price is clearly wrong. We have a bear breakout and here we have a bear breakout. This is a reversal up and then down. It doesn't matter. You trade this the same as you trade that. You sell closes. You sell for any reason. The market is telling you that the price is too high and it's going to go lower. It's going down to find a new fair price. Bear breakout, lower trading range. Bear reversal, doesn't matter. You trade them the same. The bear trend here looks the same as the bear trend here. It does not matter what came before. You trade them the same. The market is looking for a new lower price. Sometimes a reversal can be obvious after simply a single bar. We have a bear trend, three pushes down. One, two, three. Consecutive sell climaxes here. A little bit here. More here. More here. Probably going down too far too fast. And the odds are it's going to reverse. Here we have a single very big bull trend bar closing on its high. Totally reversing this final bear trend bar. We're probably going higher for at least a couple of legs. A single bar like this can be enough to convince traders that a reversal is taking place. Strong bull reversal. Wedged bottom. Traders expect that the market is always in long and that will go higher. And with every additional bull bar, the traders become more confident that it will go up for some kind of a measured move. Some reversals take place with one bar. Some take a lot of bars before it becomes clear that the market has reversed. This is the high of this bear trend. However, initially this is simply a pullback in a bull trend. And the pullback kept growing and growing and growing. 20 bars or more. And at some point you have an endless pullback. A pullback that just keeps growing and growing and growing. The more bars that get added, the more the market becomes 50-50. The probability that the market will resume up drops to the same as the probability that the market will reverse down. Usually after about 20 bars, the probability is the same. This is a transition from a bull trend into a bear trend. This is the early stages of a bear trend. It's still a bull flag and it's also a trading range. However, it's the beginning of a bear trend. It did not clearly become bearish until we had a couple big bear bars here and then here, maybe here, two or three bear bars. At that point, the market has clearly reversed and we're going lower for at least a couple legs. One pullback, two or two. We have a parabolic wedge top, one or one and then two, three. And then a pullback for five, ten bars. It became 20 bars, endless pullback. And you have to be thinking that instead of a pullback, this is a trading range and the market has an equal chance of a downside breakout as it does a resumption of the bull trend. This totally reversed the rally. Bear channel, bull flag. But the more bars that get added to it, it becomes an endless pullback. And once you have about 20 bars and a pullback, you have to be thinking about the probability of a bear breakout is about the same as the probability of a resumption of the bull trend. The bears need two things, a break up bar and a follow through bar. Preferably a big bear trend bar closing below its midpoint or closing on its low, followed by another bear bar. And if they get that, you probably have a measured move down at a minimum. It becomes a measuring gap. Strong bear bar, big trend bar closing below its midpoint. Good follow through bar closing around its midpoint, but what with a bear body. The bulls gave up. The bears saw the bulls giving up and the bears sold strongly, expecting at least two legs down. Here we have a bear trend and a reversal, but it's a bear flag. Yet we got a bull breakout above the bear flag. Again, endless pullback and then a bull breakout and a follow through bar. Bulls channel, so a bear flag. And we tried to get a bear breakout. We tried to get a bear breakout again, but failed. And it looks like we may be breaking above the top of a bear flag. We might be getting a bull breakout above a bear flag, and that can lead to a measured move up. This low tested this high, possible measuring gap here, and we went up for about a measured move. The breakout was very clear here and here. We have a bull trend bar here occurring in a bear flag. More and more traders are beginning to believe that the bears are going to lose and that we're going to get a bull breakout above the bear flag and a measured move up. Now we have three consecutive bull bars closing on or near their highs. And then we have a pullback trying to reverse, but this low stayed above the breakout point. So we might have a measuring gap here or a measured move up. Very big bull trend bar, probably going higher. Follow through bar, probably going higher. And it's a bull breakout above the bear flag. We broke out here. We broke out here. We broke out here. We broke out here. This is when it became most clear. And what this is, is the bears giving up. They're finally giving up. I call it a give up bar, a pair of give up bars, the bears giving up. I began by talking about what I mean by reversal. Reversal can be simply a change in behavior from a trading range to a bull or bear trend. I usually reserve the term reversal for one trend becoming an opposite trend. It's very important to distinguish between minor reversals and major reversals. Minor reversals are just a few bars, three bars, sometimes five or 10 bars. And it does not lead to an opposite trend. If a pattern is big enough, 10 or 20 bars, it has a much better chance of leading to an opposite trend. And at that point, I call it a major trend reversal. A bigger pattern is a major trend reversal. Reversals usually begin with breakouts, even though the breakouts are sometimes very small. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of four videos on reversals. This is the first of four videos on reversals. This is the first of four videos on reversals.