 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos on scaling into trades. In this video, I'm going to be talking about two simple strategies. The first one is when you enter a trade and then you enter a trade again a second time. So you're entering in two different parts. For that, I will use an example of an E-mini trade where you buy or sell one contract and then you add to your position buying or selling a second contract. Next, I'll talk about another sample strategy. This time where you divide your position into four different parts. And for that, I'll use a Forex market and 400,000 units. So your first entry is 100,000 units. Your second entry is 100,000 units. And your third entry is 200,000 units. So four parts, but three entries. Here we have a strong bull trend and a double bottom bull flag. You can call it a triangle. We went up and down here. But in any case, let's say you buy one contract above a high two bull flag. And let's say you can trade two contracts and you're willing to buy more one point lower. Again, equal to the distance of a minimum scalp in the E-mini. And let's say you're willing to risk six points below the first buy. So if you buy here, you're willing to put a stop six points down and you're going to be buying one point lower. So you'll be risking five points on your second entry. That means you're willing to risk 11 points to make one point. Now in this particular case, if you're buying this double bottom bull flag, you might put your stop just below the double bottom. Your actual risk is not 11 points trying to make one point or two points. The risk is not as great as it appears. And if the market quickly goes up for a scalp, assuming you're scalping this, you bought one contract here. It quickly went to your target and you take a one point profit on the one contract. Now this is a strategy about scaling in in two parts. You only put the second part on if the market goes against you and falls at least one point below your first entry. And a lot of times it doesn't fall. It just goes up, especially in a high probability buy. Very strong momentum up. Chances are if you get a double bottom, a high two bull flag, you're going to make money without having to scale in. If that happens, you just take your profit and that's okay. Most traders in a situation like this after a strong rally would not be scalping for one point. They would be holding and maybe getting out here. Spike and channel up. And micro double top here and here. Wedge one, two, three, parabolic wedge. Why climax here? But anyway, most traders would not scalp their entire position here. They might scalp part, but most traders would hold at least part for swing up. Again, the trader who bought here did not have to scale in because the market never went against him. It quickly went to his target and he took his profit. Talking about the risk when you're scaling in. Most traders should not be scaling in because the risk reward is really bad. You know, you end up getting a very big risk and you're probably not going to get much of a reward, especially if you're scalping. You have to make a lot of good decisions and you need really good trade management. I'll talk about that later on in the video. It's too difficult for most traders to do this consistently well. So let's say you see a strong bull trend, strong second leg up. Maybe we'll get a third leg up and a fourth leg up and it just keeps going up all day. And so you're looking at this and you say, OK, I bought here. I got out here. I want to buy again. I'm going to buy the follow through after this bull breakout bar. Most traders would not do this. This is a series of buy climaxes here and then here and then here and here. Parabolic wedge, the biggest bull bar late in the trend. But the math is still good, even buying up here. However, the chances are you're going to get some kind of a pullback. But let's say you took that worst entry and bought up here again. So you bought one contract up there arguing very tight bull channel first reversal down minor. The best the bears probably get is a trading range. And then let's say you place a limit order to buy more one point lower. So you buy one contract in the green box and the second contract on the yellow box. Stop is down here. It's 18 ticks below the first entry, 14 ticks below the second entry. So your total risk if you buy here and buy more here is 32 ticks and you're simply trying to make four ticks. You're just hoping the market gets back to that green box. So you get out break even on that buy and with four ticks on this buy. And you can say, wait a minute. That's crazy. How can I take that buy? Can't risk that much to make that little. Well, the reality is most of the time you're not going to buy the worst price. Chances are you'll be buying somewhere in here and it will quickly go to your target. And also if the reversal down is strong enough, you're not going to let your stop get hit. You'll get out before your stop is hit. The high close in any bull trend is always a magnet because you have traders who bought it. And usually a market does not reverse down into a bear trend. It reverses down into a trading range. Any bear selling up here is expecting at best a trading range. So he's going to sell and they'll buy back for scalp and look to sell again higher. And the bulls know the first reversal down from a very tight bull channel like this is going to be minor. And chances are for the bears, the best that will follow is the trading range. So the bulls know that if they sell here, trading range goes down and it goes back up. They know that they'll probably be able to get out without a loss. A lot of traders they buy here. Maybe they buy more here. They place a limit order to get out break even at their first entry. And they make their one point profit on their second entry. Some traders would buy here and then buy above a bull bar here or here. And they would make more on their second entry. And that's okay as well. This is a very tight bull channel. It's a micro channel, no pullbacks. They could go up for 5, 10, 15 more bars. And that's why bulls will buy here despite the climax of this bar. And despite the consecutive buy climaxes, they see the momentum is so strong that chances are it's going higher. And even if it does not, chances are they will be able to avoid a loss because the first reversal down will probably come back up and test that buy. Anytime you do a reasonable buy, the market usually allows you to get out without a loss. Buying up here, chances are it's going to come back there at some point and you can avoid a loss. A big bull bar consecutive buy climaxes here, bad follow through here, bad follow through here, bad follow through here, bad follow through here, bad follow through. You know, when you get a series of consecutive buy climaxes and then you get the big bull bar at the end, chances are you're soon going to go into a trading range. So most traders would not buy up there. But even if you did take that worst entry, it's still not a terrible thing to do because if you manage your trade well, you can make money. Make money buying here or better buying above a bull bar here or maybe a double bottom here, maybe above that bull bar there. Only 25% of bull breakouts of bull channels result in stronger bull trends. 75% of the time, if you have a bull channel, even a very tight one like this, the market's going to get at least to the bottom of the channel. And usually you get a couple of legs sideways to down. A reversal down after a tight bull micro channel unlikely to result in a bear trend. The bears usually will need a major trend reversal like this before they can get a swing down. The bull's buying here. Once it does this, they know they bought at a high price, but they're also pretty confident that it will come back to the bulls. That will come back to that price and they'll be able to get up, break even, maybe a small loss, maybe a small profit. The reward is small compared to the risk. So if you buy here and buy more here, your risk is very big and the reward is very small. So you have a terrible risk reward trade, but a 10 bar bull micro channel, you have a very high probability. Of at least avoiding a loss. And that's always the case. Whenever you have bad risk reward, you're going to have high probability. Whenever you have high probability, you're going to have bad risk reward. Your initial risk is eight times greater than your reward. You can only make money on it if you manage your trade really well. And that's why most traders should be very careful about that. And as far as scaling in, you know, only experts should do that. The main reason why they scale in. The main reason they scale in is to increase probability and they know they pay for it by increasing risk. Now they have a bigger position and the stop is far away. Experts routinely scale in to improve risk reward. I talked about how much the trader is risking that if they buy up here and here, and they're trying to get a one point scalp on the second entry, their risk is eight times bigger than their reward. Well, experts can improve that risk reward. Number one, they rarely will ever let the stop get hit. They'll get up before. So they're not really planning to risk eight times. Second, a lot of times, most of the time, they're not buying at the worst price. They're buying at a better price. Also, they can increase their reward by scaling in more. And sometimes their second or third entry can be larger than their first. And finally, they can end up swinging part of their trade because this could go up a long, long way. And if it went up a long, long way, it would more than compensate for the terrible initial risk reward ratio. Now let's talk about a bear trend. We've been trading down for 30 bars, 40 bars. We got a bear breakout and follow through. Chances are we're going lower. We broke below the low of the past 30, 40, 50 bars, maybe 60 bars. And we have a bear follow through bar. Chances are we're going lower. However, we might pull back deeply. The bears are confident that the reversal up will lead to a second leg down as long as it does not go above the top of the last major lower high. Major to lower high. We have a reasonably strong breakout to a new bear trend low. Any reversal up is probably a minor reversal. In other words, a bull leg and a trading range or a bull leg and a bear flag. A lot of traders, as I said, some will sell more at a fixed interval higher, like a multiple of a scalp. So if it's the E-mini, maybe they'll trade, they'll sell more one point higher, two points higher. Others will simply say, OK, I'll sell a 50% pullback. So the stop is up here. The bottom of the leg is here. Here's 50% pullback. So they sell initially here and then they sell more here. Stop above the top of the bear leg. And their intention is to get out at a minimum, break even on their first entry and then with a profit on their second. This 50% pullback is five ticks above the first, not four ticks. So not one point is five ticks. If they get out here, they get five ticks profit there and then break even here. Here they're selling above this bear bar, betting that it's a bad reversal. Chances are we'll get a second leg down. I use that as an example. They could have sold the close of this bar. They could have sold the close of that bar. They could have sold this bar as it's forming. I'm just using this as an example of another way that traders often enter in a bear trend. Actual risk was less than the initial risk. The initial risk was above the top of this bear leg. Their actual risk was here. Actual risk was a total of 15 ticks. And that's a total of 10 ticks on their first entry and then five ticks on their second entry. A lot of bears would swing, but they'll look at this and say, I don't know, this is a pretty big reversal up. Maybe the premise of a bear trend is not so good. Maybe it's just going to be a trading range. So they'll be sufficiently disappointed by the number of bars and the tightness of this bull channel to just get out break even on their first entry and profit on their second. I want to talk about another strategy. This time, instead of entering with two parts, I'm going to talk about entering with four parts. And I'll use a 400,000 unit forex position as an example. Same chart as we had. And let's say it's a forex chart this time. And let's say you're willing to buy a total of 400,000 units. And your stop is far away. Instead of buying 400,000 units here, you just buy one quarter of that, 100,000 units. Again, same problem. Very tight bull channel. Consecutive buy climaxes here, here, here, here, and here. So, probably will turn into a trading range soon. But strong enough move up that the first reversal down will probably be minor and lead to a trading range instead of a bear trend. The bears will probably need a lower high major trend reversal or some kind of major trend reversal before they can get a swing down. You know, you could have bought anywhere in here. Maybe you bought and took a profit, bought and took a profit, bought and took a profit. And you bought here and then it did this. And you said, well, I don't care. It's probably a minor reversal and we'll probably get a trading range and I'll probably be able to either make money or avoid a loss. But I do know one thing. No matter where I bought, even if I bought the absolute worst price, my stop is below the bottom of the bull leg. The bottom of this major high or low. If the market falls below this, then the premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. You can see later in the day what happened. When it fell below it, the bulls gave up and the bears sold the rally for a second leg down. This strategy involves four parts. So you buy one part here, 100,000 units. Let's say the euro versus the dollar. And you might want to place a limit order to buy 100,000 more, 10 pips lower. 10 pips the minimum scalp size. And then I said four parts, but I did not say four entries. Let's say you are willing to buy an additional 200,000 units. In other words, a double size position if it falls to a second scalp size down. Okay. So you buy this 10 pips below that. And then this you're looking to buy above a bull bar reversal up here. This is actually 18 pips below the first entry, not two times the scalp size, but close enough. Ideally, you'd rather have this be three or four times the minimum scalp. So you'd rather have it be 30 pips below the green entry, maybe 40 pips below. 20 pips is pretty much the minimum that you'd want for a third entry like that. Probably sufficiently disappointed by this so that you'll be happy to get out around your first entry. Because after you see this many bars sideways to down, you're probably concluding that the market is now in a trading range instead of a bull trend. If it's in trading range and it gets high back to the original close, it's probably not going to go much higher. So you buy 100,000 units here, 100,000 units here, and then 200,000 units here with the plan to get out around your original entry, that green box. So you make zero pips on your first entry, 10 pips lower here, so you make 10 pips on that entry, and you make 18 pips on this entry, but it's a double sized position. So you made 36 pips on your third entry. Total risk, 100,000 units to here, 100,000 units to here, 200,000 units to here. Total risk is 196 pips. And you made 36 pips. So you're not planning on letting your stop get hit. You would get out before your stop would get hit. Also, you're probably not going to enter on the exact worst price like in the example that I just gave. Let me talk about a bear example. And you can divide your entire position into four parts. Here we have a trading range, and the bulls know the market should not fall below the bottom of this major high or low. And if it does, then the premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. You have to then be thinking that maybe we're in a trading range or a bear trend. Well, clearly we're already in a trading range. And here we did get a bear breakout and follow through. Chances are we get at least a little bit more down. So with that in mind, let's say you sold above the high of this bear bar bidding against the reversal up. And let's say you sold another 100,000 units, 10 pips higher. The minimum scalp, 10 pips. And then you look for a bear bar and you sell below a bear bar right here. And you decide that for your third entry, you're going to have it be a double size. So this is a quarter of your position, quarter of your position, and this is half of your position. So you have a total of four parts, but only three entries. In general, you want this entry to be at least three times the size of a minimum scalp, like 30 pips above this. But sometimes you don't get it. And here you get a bear bar selling below a bear bar and a bear flag, especially if you're scaling in. That is a reasonable thing to do. The size of the rally is enough to make you concerned about your premise of a second leg down. It makes you wonder if we're simply going to go sideways here. Maybe a trending trading range day. Upper range, brief breakout, and then lower range. Because you're probably fairly disappointed by the extent of that rally, you might place a limit order to get out break even at your first entry. So you get out break even on your first entry and 10 pips profit on your second entry. This is 13 pips higher than that, but it's a double sized position. So you make 26 pips there. You make a total of 36 pips. Total initial risk from this trade to there, plus this to there, plus this, a double size position, to there. Total risk is 106 pips. But your actual risk was 7 pips less per trade because we never got to your stock. So the actual risk was 1 pip above this, and your actual risk was 78 pips, and you made 36 pips on the trade. You don't always enter at the worst price. Here it does make sense to enter at the worst price. You don't always scale in 3 times. A lot of times you'll just sell here and then sell more and blow a bear bar. Usually the pullbacks are not that deep. Usually the trend reversal down is stronger. So this is an example of pretty much a worst case scenario. The only thing that could be worse is if your stock got hit. Most of the time when you're scaling in, you're not going to be risking 78 pips to make 36 pips. I'm just giving you several examples on scaling in trades, and there are many different ways to do it. And if you're an expert trader, you're very flexible about it. There's no fixed rigid way to do it. I'm going to sell 10 pips higher, 20 pips higher. Some traders do that. Other traders, instead of selling a fixed number of pips higher, they'll sell 50% pullback right around here. Or they'll only sell their second entry below a bear bar, and that second entry has to be at least two or three times bigger than a minimum scalp. All of the ways are good as long as they are logical and make good sense mathematically. Management after you enter many choices. Do I get out break even on my entire trade, or do I try to get out break even on my bad entry and then with a profit on the other entries? Do I swing part or all of the position? And because of all those decisions, it's really easy to make a lot of mistakes. And therefore, when you're trading like this, if you are going to be scaling in, especially scaling in a second time and a third time, you know, you should only be doing it if you're an experienced trader, a profitable consistently profitable trader. You also have the issue of emotions. If you sell here and you're starting out and then you see four or five, six bars going up against you, are you really willing to sell more here and sell more there? Probably difficult to do. And you probably are not trading small enough because your account size will not allow you to trade a small enough position. There are just structural problems that a trader has as a beginner that prevents him from managing these trades well. So they should not be taking trades like this. I made the point. You have to have a big enough account to allow you to trade this properly. A really important problem here is position size. And I think a lot of beginners think they can scale in and manage their trade correctly, but they really have no intention of allowing the market to get anywhere near their stop. Maybe he sells here and sells more here. And then when it goes here, he takes a loss on both thinking, Oh my gosh, I really didn't want to risk that much. But you only can take this kind of a trade if you can trade small enough. Let's say you can only trade four units or 40,000 units. Or four contracts or whatever, if you can honestly comfortably trade eight to 10 units or 80,000 units or eight to 10 contracts. You have to make sure that you're trading no more than half of a position size that is normally comfortable for you. The single biggest loss with this is beginners are not trading small enough. And then when the market gets near their stock, they exit. All they're thinking about is risk. There are three variables, risk, reward, and probability. Beginners only think about risk and they ignore probability and they ignore reward. And they manage trades based entirely on risk and they end up losing money. There are three variables and you always have to be considering all three. And that is really difficult for a beginner. All right. So let's say we get a bull trend over here and you're buying for any reason. And let's say you happen to buy late, hoping that the swing will just continue up forever. You know, with consecutive buy climaxes here, here, here, and now a fourth one, we're probably not going to go much higher. We might, but you also know that you're probably not going to lose money if you buy here and manage your trade correctly. A lot of traders in this situation, if they buy here, they trade small enough to allow themselves to add on, scale in lower. So let's say you buy there and then you see this parabolic wedge or consecutive buy climaxes. And then this final big bull bar, a buy climax, end of the trend. A lot of scalpers will just get out below that reversal bar. They know that this is probably going to do this, go sideways and that the up move is probably over. So if you're a scalper and you buy there and you did not scalp out here, you got to get out here. And some swing traders who bought here, when they see this thinking that they'll think that we'll get a couple of legs sideways to down. So they will get out as well, looking to buy again lower. A lot of traders do not get up. They say, Hey, as long as it stays above this stop, the bottom of this major higher low, I'm still good. I'll take my buy here and I'll look the scale in lower and see if I can make more money. High one and high two. So some traders, if they buy here, they'll buy more here. High two bull flag. But because the market sold off so much, their premise of a relentless strong bull trend is no longer valid. Now they're thinking either weak bull trend or trading range. And because of that, they'll try to get out, break even around the high close, or maybe just simply break even at their original entry, which would be over here. Bears, bull trend, bear break below the bull trend line and couple of legs up, three pushes up and possibly a higher low major trend reversal. And they see that it's a test of the high close of the day and it's reversing down. So some bears will sell that, you know, just like the bulls will take profits there. Whenever bulls think something is good enough to take profits, there are always bears thinking it's good enough to sell. They might sell up here with a limit order at that high close or with a stop on the way down. On the way up, we're rallying strongly by the close all the way up. Let's say you buy this close. What do you do? Your stop is down here. You took the final by the close entry. You did not know that when you took the trade, but you only take that trade if you're willing to use your stop down here. And a lot of the traders who take that trade will only take that trade if they're willing to scale in more. They look for a bull bar, especially a micro double bottom, a high tube buy. So you buy here and you buy the high tube bull flag. And if you're sufficiently disappointed by the size of that sell off, you don't try to make a profit. You don't try to get out here. You might instead say, oh, this is just too many bars down. However, I should be able to avoid a loss. And the midpoint of my entry is here's my upper entry. Here's my lower entry. I'll try to place a limit order to get out, break even on the entire position, which is halfway between the two entries. And you get out there. Sufficiently disappointed that you think big up, big down, big confusion. Trading range more likely than a bull trend. Trading range you buy low and you get out in the middle or near the top. In this video, I gave two different examples. The first was an e-mini example in which a trader trades two contracts. He enters with one contract. And then if the trade goes against him, he enters again with one contract. His total position then is two contracts. In the second strategy, I used an example of a Forex trade in which a trader is comfortable trading 400,000 units. And he divides his position into four parts. He enters the market with one part. 100,000 units. And then as the market goes against him, he enters again with another 100,000 units. And if the market further goes against him, he takes a third position, but this time with 200,000 units for a total position size of 400,000 units. And I talk about how to manage the trade. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos on scaling into trades. Here he will see you on the project of fentanylis. Now in the highlighted bag. Thank you for now. We'll see you back in the description. Now see theière dansaitreend invest you into trades.