 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on reversals. I think it's important to realize that most major reversals are successful only 40% of the time. 40% of the time you get either a swing trade or a trend. 60% of the time you either get a trading range or a continuation of the prior trend. When I'm looking for a reversal, my minimum objective is 10 bars and two legs, TBTL. Most major reversals, even wedges, have a double top or a double bottom involved with them. I said that 40% of reversals lead to a major reversal, a swing in the opposite direction. 60% are small winners or small losers, and they essentially offset one another. 60% of the time you get a bull trend. We have a bull trend. The market went sideways to break below the trend line. And now we have a higher high. It's also an expanding triangle. Up, down, more up, more down, up. And a decent sell signal bar. So it's reasonable to sell this as a higher high major trend reversal. All expanding triangle tops are higher high major trend reversals. A trader who took that trade, if he held through this, he got stopped out right here with a small loss. Now we have a wedge, three pushes up, one, two, three. I do not have the bull trend line drawn in, but it's a wedge with a wedge shape. We have a micro double top, reasonable sell either below that bull bar or below the spare bar. The market did not fall quickly and traders would exit with a small win at the end of the session. The small loss here, offset by a small win here. In the E-mini, if you're looking for a swing trade, a major reversal is a swing trade. You want the reward to be at least two times your risk because your probability of success is only 40%. And you need at least a reward twice your risk to make the trader's equation positive. So for example, if you're risking two points, you have to be trying to make four points. Here we have two attempts at the top. Here, higher high, major trend reversal. Here, a wedge. After 10 similar trades, you might have four winners with four points each for 16 points. And maybe six losers, two points each for minus 12 points, usually less. And your net profit would be four points. So if you take 10 trades, you would end up with a profit. I think the math is actually better than this, but I'm just giving this as an illustration of more or less a worst case outcome. If you take 10 reasonable major trend reversals with good setups like this, the odds are you're going to end up with a profitable basket of trades. Let me talk about a Forex trade where you're looking for a major trend reversal. You want a swing trade. A minimum swing trade in the Forex market is probably 40 pips. And let's say you have to risk 20 pips to take the trade. And let's say you took 10 trades similar to this. Here we have a higher high major trend reversal. And now we have a wedge top. If you took 10 comparable decent setups with decent signal bars, after 10 trades, you might have four winners that led to a swing trade, 40 pips. So four times 40, you'd have a total of 160 pips profit on your four winners. And your six losers, if you lost the full 20 pips, you'd lose a total of 120 pips. And your net for the 10 trades would be a 40-pip profit. It actually would be better because you probably would lose less than 120 pips on the six losers. Because the six losers probably would not be six losers. It might be three small losers and three small winners. But in any case, if you took 10 trades and they had reasonable setups, the odds are that you would probably end up with a profit. The math is actually better than what I just said. Here's the E-mini. When I said six losers, I did not mean six losers. I meant six trades that did not achieve a swing profit. And those six losers are a combination of small losses and small wins that balance each other out. And the probability of winning is often more than 40%. And some trades go for much more than four points. We have a bull trend and a bear break below the bull trend line. You can call it a wedge. One, two, three. And you have a small lower high major trend reversal. Or you can call it a small double top in a tight trading range. You can call it a double top right here in a tight trading range. And you look at a tight trading range like that and you have a good sell signal bar. There actually is a 40% chance you're going to get a swing down. Two legs down. One pull back two. Or one pull back two. So it's a reasonable setup. Your stop is not far above. And if you held all the way down here, your reward would be much, much bigger than two times your risk. In this particular case, if you held all the way down here, you would have exited with 18 points profit, which is far more than twice your initial risk. And some of your winners will be very big like that and they'll more than offset the small losses. This is the euro versus the dollar, a five-minute chart. We have a bull trend and a bear breakout. And then we entered a tight trading range. And within the tight trading range, we have a double top. Good sell bar here. Good sell bar here. It's a reasonable trade. When you have a double top, lower high, major trend reversal in a tight trading range, there actually is a 40% chance of two legs down. One pull back two or one pull back two. And in your basket of 10 trades, you probably will get at least one that looks like this. When I said if you take 10 trades and you'd have six losers, I did not mean that. I meant you'd have six trades that were not swing trades of 40 pips or more. And most of those losers are small wins or small losses that balance each other out. 40% of the trades will result in a profit of at least 40 pips. Let's say you sold this as a lower high major trend reversal. Or this as a double top lower high major trend reversal. A tight trading range with a double top lower high in it is a 40% bet that you'll get at least two legs down. A decent sell signal bar here, decent sell signal bar here. This is a reasonable trade. Even if you took this short, this did not hit your stop. So this short, you're still short here. If you exited at the end of the session, you would have had 90 pips profit. That more than offsets the risk. And if you take 10 comparable, reasonable major trend reversals, you will get one or two that have exceptional profits. And that is why trading major trend reversals is a good thing to do. The 40% of the time when you do get a swing profit more than offset the 60% of the time when you do not. The minimum objective when you're looking for a reversal, 10 bars, two legs. It can be more than 10 bars. It can be more than two legs. But this is a minimum reasonable objective. Any kind of reversal or any kind of a big move, a breakout, a climax, a reversal, the minimum objective is TBTL. 10 bars, two legs in the opposite direction. For example, here, we've got a higher low major trend reversal. Minimum objective, two legs up, one, pullback, two, and 10 bars. This obviously is much more than that. You can also say it's more than two legs. One, two, three, four, five, depending on what you want to call a leg. Higher low major trend reversal. A bull bar, slight micro double bottom, second entry, reasonable buy. Stop goes below the bottom of the higher low. Do not get stopped out here. And the swing continued up. A trading range. A bull breakout, measured move up. And now we have a wedge, nested wedge actually. One, two, three. And three subdivides into one, two, three. A decent bear bar. A good location to get out. Especially since it's at the top of a larger trading range. You could draw the measured move up using this high instead of that high. Some computers will use this high. Others will use that high. If you used this high, the pink line, it did not quite reach there. But we still reverse down and we still have a wedge. And we're still testing the top of the chart. Good to get out below the low of that bar. This is the euro versus the dollar. And it's a 15-minute chart. And it's a broad, bare channel. Lots and lots of minor reversals. Lots of major reversals as well. In general, when I'm trading, I look at the highest time frame that shows the pattern. We have a wedge bottom. One, two, three on the 15-minute chart. And you expect 10 bars and two legs up. But is it 10 bars on this time frame? Or 10 bars on the highest time frame that also shows the same pattern? If you're looking for 10 bars and two legs, you have it right here. However, the pattern is so big, it's probably also a wedge bottom on a higher time frame chart. I want 10 bars, two legs up on the highest time frame chart that shows the pattern. And I'm going to look at the higher time frame chart. And I'm going to look at the higher time frame chart. In this particular case, we have, I don't know, 50, 100 bars here. 50, 100 bars here. I'm going to take a look at a higher time frame chart to see if there's also a good wedge. Here is the 60-minute chart of the same bars. And it also has the wedge bottom. One, two, three. I'm going to look for 10 bars and two legs up on the 60-minute chart, not just on the 15-minute chart. On the 15-minute chart, this was the end of the two legs up. On the 60-minute chart, it went higher, and the second leg up is over here. You'd make an additional 30 or 40 pips if you set your target based upon the 60-minute chart. 10 bars and two legs on the 15-minute chart ended right here. It's only part of one leg up and only three bars up on the 60-minute chart. Yet, the pattern is still obvious on the 60-minute chart. So, I have to be setting my target based upon the highest time frame that clearly shows the pattern. And that's the 60-minute chart. So, two legs up, one, pull back, two. Minimum objective, two legs sideways to up. So, either here or here. If you're looking at a 15-minute chart and you compress the bars so that you have a lot of bars on the screen, you see a broad, bare channel and three pushes down. Three or four. One, two, three, four. Or one, two, three. It's a wedge bottom. And we have a small final flag here and a reversal. However, I want to look at a 60-minute chart. This pattern is maybe 100 bars, 200 bars. Maybe the same pattern is present on the 60-minute chart. And it is. That's what we see over here on the 60-minute chart. So, I'm going to set my objective based upon the highest time frame that shows the pattern. This is the 15-minute objective, 10 bars, two legs. And it was achieved here. The 60-minute chart actually even got a larger two-legged pattern. One, pull back, two. Here's the wedge bottom on the 15-minute chart. Also present on the 60-minute chart. I'm going to look for the target based upon the 60-minute chart. All trend reversals begin with a breakout of the channel. Bull trend, bull channel. For a reversal, I need a breakout below the channel. Bear trend, bear channel. For it to reverse into a bull trend, traders need a breakout of the bear channel. We have a bull trend line for a bull trend. And traders need to see a pullback that breaks the bottom of the channel. In other words, the bull trend line. And preferably, it has to be strong enough to get down to the 20-bar exponential moving average. You want some sign of strength on the part of the bears before anticipating a reversal into a bear trend. Next, after the break below the channel, you want the bull trend to resume and to reverse down a second time. Once we got near the old high, we have a second pullback that began. But the pullback kept growing and became a reversal into a bear trend. A lower high major trend reversal. All major trend reversals are types of double tops. Here it's a lower high double top and a strong reversal down into a bear trend. Bull to bear trend reversal. You need a break below the trend line. And then you need a test of the old high. And then a second reversal down. Here we have a bear trend reversing into a bull trend. You need a break above the bear channel. And then a resumption of the trend down. Here we resume down twice. And then you get to see a reversal up from there. We have a higher low major trend reversal. And now we have a double bottom higher low. So it's a double bottom higher low major trend reversal. And it led to a bull trend. Most reversals are double tops or double bottoms. Or some variation of a double top or a double bottom. And that's even true with wedge reversals. There's usually a double top or a double bottom involved. Lower high major trend reversal. But it's actually a type of a double top. Higher low is the type of double bottom. And then we have an additional double bottom here. Since reversals involve some kind of a test. Most reversals are double tops or double bottoms. I talk about this more in the video on major trend reversals. Again, this is a double top. But a slightly lower low double top. So it's a variation of a double top. And here we have a double bottom here. And a double bottom there. And then a small double bottom higher low here. Again, double bottoms. A bear trend. And then a test of the bear trend. Here and again here. Creating some kind of a double bottom. And the bear trend fails to continue down. And the market goes in the opposite direction. The bull trend tried to resume. But it failed a second time. Creating a double top. And that led to the reversal. Double tops and double bottoms. They're rarely perfect. And a lot of times they're not all that obvious. A lot of times they're distorted. And it's difficult to see them. And a lot of times traders will describe them by some other term. Like a major trend reversal. A failed breakout. A final flag reversal. Or a wedge. But there's still a double top there. Or a double bottom there. If you understand what's going on. And you know what to look for. A double top. May not look like a double top. Because the two highs are not at the same price. But that's a double top. The bulls tried to resume the trend. And they failed around the same price as they failed previously. Another double top with these two highs. Or this high and that high. Doesn't matter. Some computers will say it's a double top with this. The bull trend tried to reverse. And it failed again around the prior high. And reversed down. So it's a double top. A small double bottom. And a micro double bottom here. This low and that low. Micro double bottom. And a small double bottom. A double top. A double top. With a micro double top. Double top bear flag. Led to a trend resumption down. The bear trend resumed. But it failed to continue. It reversed up. So we have a bottom. And a second bottom. It's a double bottom. Even though this bottom is slightly below that bottom. It's still a double bottom. And it led to at least a minor reversal. The bull trend tried again to begin. And it failed around the price where it failed earlier. Slightly lower high. But it's still a double top. And since it's in a bear trend. I call it a double top bear flag. The bear trend resumed. But reversed up around where it reversed up previously. It's a slightly lower low. But it's still a double bottom. And it led to a reversal. The bears again tried to get a double top. With this high or that high. Or this high and that high. And the bears tried to get a reversal down. But this bull breakout was too strong. And this became a pullback from this breakout. And then ultimately led to a successful breakout. Above the top of a 50 bar trading range. Small double top here. And it became the neckline of a head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder. Left shoulder. Left shoulder. Head. Right shoulder. The double top bear flag failed. It started to go down. But immediately reversed up. Just like this double top. Failed. It started to go down. But broke to the upside. This is a double top with this high or that high. And a double top with this high or that high. Some computers will use any of these tops. The basic point is it's a type of double top. But it failed. This is also a double top. Even though this high is much above that high. And this is another double top. Again, a higher high double top. But a double top. The market tried to go up and reverse down around the same price as it reversed down previously. Although when you look at these double tops and double bottoms, you might not think of them as double tops and double bottoms. But the computers do. They see two attempts to go one way. Both reversing around the same price. Double tops. Double bottoms. And that's how you should see them as well. Strong reversal up. Wedge. One. Two. Three. We've sold off strongly. And reversed up just as strongly. Odds are we're going to get at least a small second leg sideways to up. Maybe a sideways leg here. Pull back. Maybe a second leg up here. Bear trend. Decent bull breakout. We're still in the bear channel. You can say we're still in the bear channel. But it's a pretty strong reversal. And it's a third reversal up. One. Two. Three. So it's a wedge bottom. Possible triangle final flag. Bear breakout. Usually the final leg of the bear trend. A triangle late in a bear trend usually becomes the final flag. Even with a strong breakout like this you have to assume the market will come back to the apex of the triangle. Strong enough breakout probably will get a second leg up. Bulls put a stop below the low and they hold. They look to buy more above a bull bar here or here or here. A second entry buy. One. Two. Looking for a second leg up. This higher low is a test of the prior bear low. And it's also a pullback from this first leg up. Higher low. Expect a second leg up. Even stronger reversal up. This is much stronger than this. It's a possible second leg trap. But probably strong enough so that whatever sell-off we get. It'll stay above that low. And be followed by at least a small second leg up. It's a bigger higher low major trend reversal. We have a bear trend. A breakout not completely out of the bear channel. But higher low major trend reversal. Now we have a bear trend. Clearly a strong breakout far above the top of the channel. Traders will look at any reversal down as likely to fail. And they'll buy a reversal up. Strong bear breakout. First reversal up. A lot of traders will take a second entry here. We have a breakout of this bull flag. And traders will buy above this bull bar. A pullback from this breakout. Strong bull breakout. The bulls don't mind the strong sell-off. They're expecting the sell-off to fail and form a higher low. And they hope it'll be the first of many higher lows and the start of a bull trend. Another higher low here. Here we have a lower low major trend reversal. And you expect two legs up. After you've had the first leg up and you get a higher low, you expect a second leg up. Like in the prior slide. In this slide we have a lower low reversal. So you expect two legs up. Remember, when you have a reversal, you expect two legs up. If the reversal comes from a lower low, you expect two legs up from there. If the reversal begins with a higher low, you expect only one more leg up. Lower low. Major trend reversal. Bear trend. Pretty good reversal up. And then we have a couple legs down to a lower low. We have a micro-double bottom and a bull bar. It's a reasonable buy. Looking for two legs up. One pullback. Two. That's the minimum objective. Minimum goal for all bull reversals is a swing up. A swing up, you want at least TBTL. Ten bars, two legs. And we have more than ten bars and we have two legs. The minimum objective has been met. It's a swing trade. In general, it's good to take off half of your position at two times your risk. You buy here. Initial risk is here. This is one times your risk. That's two times your risk. It's reasonable to take half of your position off there and then swing the rest. Stop is down here below the bottom of your signal bar. After this strong breakout, this then becomes a major higher low. After this strong breakout, this is the major higher low. After this breakout, traders move their stop to just below this low. The most recent major higher low. Here, I'm talking about initial risk. The math is actually based upon actual risk. I talk more about this on the video on actual risk. If you buy above this bar, the market went right up. Your actual risk was probably only somewhere down here. Maybe slightly below this bar. Less than the initial risk. The actual risk is so small that two times actual risk is not a big enough target when you're looking at a pattern this big. So, minimum goal, I would base it upon initial risk. And I would expect more than that because even two times the initial risk is not very big. You're probably going to get more than two times the initial risk. But that is a reasonable initial target. After you've had your two legs up and you're more than two times your initial risk, you have to be looking for reasons to take profit. And here, we're fairly high up. We're testing the lower highs in the bear trend. Those are all targets. Bulls will take profits around there. And if you get a reversal down, especially a second reversal down with a bear bar, it's reasonable to take profits on your longs from down here. Expecting that the bear trend ultimately would evolve into a trading range and that the bull trend would be a bull leg in that trading range. And it would probably stall around one of the prior lower highs in the bear trend. Nested wedge, strong breakout, second push, third push, and we have a smaller wedge here. Reasonable to exit below that bear bar, even below that little bear bar. It's also a double top, resistance at the prior lower highs in the bear trend. Very strong breakout often leads to a measured move. Either from the open or low of the bar to the close or high of the bar. And that measured move is also right there. Another reason for bulls to take profits. Leg one, pull back. Leg two, the measured move is in this general area as well. Another reason to take profits up there. Here we have a higher high major trend reversal. Strong breakout, not good short. We have another top attempt here. So it's a wedge. One, two, three. You can call this a final flag. You can call this a higher high major trend reversal. In any case, you're looking for two legs down. One pull back. Two as a minimum. Maybe one pull back. Two. If you take this as a lower high major trend reversal, your minimum objective is only one more leg down because a lower high means you've already had one leg down. Higher high major trend reversal. Bull trend. Bear breakout. 10 to 20 bars sideways. Expect a reversal down. Either below that doji bar, below that bear bar, below this bar. Or you could wait and sell the lower high here or below these bars. Double top bear flag. You could sell below that bar looking for another leg down. Expecting a series of lower highs and lower lows. A bear trend. If you're selling a lower top, here we have a double top, lower high, major trend reversal. If you take that short, you expect at least one more leg down. Because a reversal, you're expecting two legs down. One pull back. Two. If you're selling after the first leg down. If you're selling a lower high, you're selling after the first leg down. Your minimum goal is one more leg down. Although you can get many more legs down. Remember, the minimum goal of all bear reversals is a swing trade. And you're looking for at least two legs. 10 bars, two legs. TBTL. 10 bars, two legs. You want the reward to be at least twice your risk if you're looking for a swing trade. If you took the short below that bull bar, your initial risk is right above the high. This is two times your risk. That would be the minimum goal for taking partial profits. Most reversal patterns involve trading ranges. In addition to double tops and double bottoms. A major trend reversal is usually a double top, a trading range. A lot of times you'll see final flags. And other failed breakouts. That final flag is a trading range. Wedges usually have trading ranges near the end. Double tops and double bottoms obviously are trading ranges. A triangle is a trading range. A head and shoulders pattern is always a trading range. And most head and shoulders patterns are also triangles. Rounded bottoms and tops. Those obviously are trading ranges. And climaxes usually have at least a small trading range. A small final flag. Or a small lower high or higher low after the climactic reversal. Today I talked about how major reversals have only about a 40% chance of leading to a swing trade. However, the 60% of the time when you don't have a swing trade, you're getting a small loss or a small win. And they tend to cancel each other out. And a lot of the 40% of the winners are very big. And they more than offset any of the small losses that you might have had. When you're looking for a major reversal, minimum goal, 10 bars, 2 legs. Also, look at the highest time frame chart that shows the pattern. If you're looking at a 1 minute chart and the pattern is also present on a 5 minute chart, don't look for 10 bars and 2 legs on the 1 minute chart. Look for the 10 bars and 2 legs on the 5 minute chart. Finally, I made the point that most reversals involve some kind of a double top or double bottom. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on reversals. De letzten Games. See you then.