 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. In this video, I'm going to be giving some examples of swing trading. I will specifically give day trading examples for swing traders. An important observation is that on the open, 50% of the opens have a breakout that fails and reverses. For example, in this particular slide, you can see that the market sold off strongly on the open and then reversed up trapping the bears. That's an opening reversal. And that sell off reverses up usually at some kind of support, although you cannot see the bars to the left to see the support. When you get the reversal up here, we have an outside up bar, a good sized bar, and then we have a second good sized bar, very little overlap closing on the high. This closed is far above the high of that bar. This closed not only is above the high of this bar and above the moving average. It's also above the high of this final bare leg. So at that point, there is probably a 70% chance of at least some kind of a measured move up. The first thing I always look at when you've got an initial breakout like this with big bullish trend bars is I look for a measured move based upon the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar. So at this point, here's the final bar. So at this point, here's the final bar. At this point, the final bar is here. At this point, the final bar is here. And then here. All the way up, I keep increasing my measured move. The chart is at this point and I don't see all of those other bars. I'm looking for a measured move projection based upon this open to that close, which projects up here. By the time this bar appears and closes, I would move this line to here and this line would then get moved further up. But in any case, I think the market clearly became always in long at this point. And at that moment, there was a 70% chance that we would get at least a measured move up based upon the size of the breakout, either the low of the bar to the high of this bar, the open of this bar to the close of that bar. A lot of bulls will therefore buy the close of this bar. And so as soon as that bar closes, they either place a limited order to buy at the price that the bar close. Sometimes you do not get filled. And the other alternative is to simply hit by the market. So as soon as this bar closes, you click by the market and you get filled pretty close to the open. Also, as the market's going up, if you did not buy the close here, you simply can buy at the market at any point because you know there's a 70% chance of the market going at least to this point. And as the breakout increases in size, the size of the target gets further up. Let's say you did not buy this close. And then the market goes up to this bar. You know, this is a logical entry price. So some traders are looking for reasons to buy. They could buy the market, this blue rectangle, or they can simply place a limit order to buy a 50% pullback. So at the close of this bar, they can place a limit order to buy a 50% pullback from the original entry price to that close. And if they were lucky, they'd get filled with that pink box right there. So now we have at this point, three strong bars. We ended up with four or five strong bars. And at some point, this breakout phase of the trend is followed by a pullback, a little pullback here, a bigger pullback here. And typically what happens after the pullback is either the market enters a trading range and then decides between trend reversal down and trend resumption up, or the pullback leads to a channel as was the case here. Here's the pullback. You can argue that there was a trading range as well to this point. And then we got a good buy signal bar and trend resumption up. But to me, this is a bear channel, a bull flag, three pushes down, one, two, three. Does not matter that the trend continued higher after the first pullback. These two bars are part of the pullback that began with this reversal down. So to me, this is a wedge bull flag. And this was the end of the pullback. And this was the start of the channel. Eventually, when you have a bull channel, you think of it as a bear flag, 75% chance you're going to get a bear breakout and usually an evolution into a trading range. Did the trading range begin here? You certainly have trading range bars starting right there. So three doji's, four doji's, five doji's. Out of the 10 bars here, they're almost all doji's. We continued higher, but the trading range might in fact have begun here. And you can see we reversed down strongly and tested the bottom of that developing trading range. When I start to see a series of doji's like this, I wonder if the channel is beginning to increase. The trend is beginning to evolve into a trading range. Again, a very strong bull breakout like this. Probably 90% chance you're going at least a little bit higher. 70% chance you'll probably go high enough up for a measured move based upon the open or low to the close of the final bar of the breakout phase. The 10% of the time when this breakout leads to the high of the day and a reversal down, it's usually a fairly clear parabolic wedge top. And this is not. You can argue first push up and then pull back and then second push up and pull back third push up. This is not how parabolic wedges typically look. Normally the first push begins after the low. And usually you have at least one or two bare bars along the way. Although this could be a parabolic wedge top in the high of the day, maybe only a 10% chance it's going to lead to a major reversal. 90% chance it leads to a pullback and then at least either trading range or continued trend. 90% chance it leads to a high of the time when this is a big gap. The first push began during the bare leg. Not typical for parabolic wedge tops. You can call this the first push and then pull back and then second push, pull back and third push. But again, no bare bars along the way. And if there's no clear argument for a wedge here, it's probably not a parabolic wedge top. And therefore the probability that this is a major reversal in the high of the day is only about 10%. When you do get a swing trade on the open or the first hour or so, it typically lasts for two to three hours. But it can be as short as 30 minutes. We could just go up for five or six bars and then reverse down. Or it can be as long as four hours or even last all day. Once you start to evolve into a trading range, you can get a late reversal down instead of trend resumption up. You know, I talked about that earlier. Bull breakout and then a channel and then it evolves into a trading range. And the trading range has about a 50% chance of trend resumption up versus trend reversal down. I talk about this more in the videos on trading ranges. Here's another chart with a very strong reversal up. And we have a micro double top and a pullback, a wedge pullback. One or one and then two and then three. This is a buy the clothes finish from yesterday. And we tried to get all through buying here. We tried here and it sold off. Then we tried again a second time from micro double bottom and sold off again. And then we ended up with a pretty strong reversal down. So a micro double top reversal down. But when it follows a very tight bull channel like this with no bear bars on the way up, it's probably only going to be a minor reversal, which means a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Take a look at how strongly down this is reversing, closing on the low. A second big bear bar closing on its low. During the open of the day like this, if I see two big bear bars closing on their lows, not much overlap. I conclude the market is always in short and that we'll go down for some kind of measured move. Even though I think there'll be buyers around a 50% pullback from the strong gold trend. And I think this is going to end up as a bear leg in what will become a trading range. At this point, two consecutive strong bear bars, I think we're going down further. And then here we have five consecutive bear bars all closing below their midpoints. That means a high probability that after the first pullback, we'll get at least a little bit more down. High probability there are sellers above the high of the prior bar. Bears will sell with a limit order at the high of that bar. And they get filled here. Even though it's a strong bull trend bar, chances are after five strong bear bars on the open, we're going down at least a little bit further. So we have a micro double top up and down, tried to go up again and turn down, and then a pair of big bear bars. You could sell the reversal down or you could sell any of these closes, or you could sell above that bear bar, arguing five consecutive bear bars closing below their midpoints on the open, probably at least a little bit more down. I describe this as a wedge first push down either that low or this bear bar or that low, doesn't matter. We went up and down here and then a second push and then pull back and then a third push. So to me, this is a wedge bull flag and a 50% pullback from yesterday's close. Also take a look at here. You see the high of this bar and then the moving average. See right in there? There's a gap. There's space between the high of this bar and the moving average. So that's a moving average gap bar. And that often leads to the final leg of a bull trend before the market attempts a major trend reversal. Here, a lower high major trend reversal. As strong as this is, it's still the first reversal down. So probably a minor reversal. At this point, you have a lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend, pretty good breakout, a lot of bear bars, and then a lower high. However, after five consecutive bull bars, usually that is not going to lead to a successful reversal, even though it is a major trend reversal. We've got a sell-off, five bars down, and then we've got another rally. So it looks like a triangle. Three pushes up. One, two, three. And then we're in breakout mode. We have a smaller triangle at the apex of a bigger triangle. So we have a big move up, a big move down, another big move up, another big move down. Big up, big down, big confusion. Big confusion means traders do not believe the market's going to go down very far. They also do not believe it's going to go up very far. So they're going to exit quickly. And that results in the formation of a trading range. And a triangle is the type of a trading range. You might sell the lower high major trend reversal. But after five consecutive bull bars like this, chances are, again, it's a minor reversal just like that. And chances are this is going to be a minor reversal up because the bear channel is so tight. Usually you do not get a protracted bull trend after a very tight channel like that. In a triangle breakout mode, 50% chance bear breakout, 50% chance bull breakout, 50% chance the first breakout up or down fails and reverses. We have the bear breakout. And it's a two legged pullback from the high. So one and then triangle and then two. Leg one and then a pullback and then two. So this is a large high two buy setup. And it's possibly a failed breakout below the triangle. This is not a good looking buy signal after four consecutive bear bars. Traders would rather buy above a bull bar like above this bar or above that bar or above that bar. Or if they want higher probability, they wait for the breakout, a very big bull breakout bar. The bears tried to get a low two short. First leg up, pull back, second leg up, tried to reverse down. Instead, we got a strong bull breakout above this low two bear flag. At this point, the bears are getting lower highs and lower lows, a bear channel. And here we got a strong bull breakout, a big bull bar closing far above the highs of the past 10 or 15 bars. And then the following bar has a bull body as well. And that increases the probability of at least a second leg up. Leg one and then pull back into a triangle and then leg two. And traders will start buying above bull bars, buying close, buying above this bull bar and then buying closes. And then a high one bull flag after a strong breakout, probably at least a little bit more up. Now, what about this low two short? We're in a bear channel, lower highs, lower low, a two legged pullback. And technically it's a short, but we have four consecutive bull bars here. Three of them, pretty good sized bull bodies closing near their highs. Probably this is a minor reversal and the best the bears will get is sideways. And they might get a total failure and a bull breakout. We have a legitimate bear flag and we've got a bull breakout. Big bar like this, you've got to be thinking about a possible measured move up, maybe from this low to that high. You can call this another wedge here, one, two, three. But whenever you have a strong breakout bar like this, we're probably going to get a second leg up. And to me, this is an example of consecutive tops. So we tried to top here, one pullback, two. And then we've got a strong breakout, probably a second leg up. Low one, low two. So it's a low four cell setup. Low one, low two, strong bull breakout. And then another complex top, two attempts, low one, low two. So we're probably going to fall for at least a couple of legs. This is a fairly common pattern on the open where you have a parabolic wedge top. Yesterday we had bear channel, bull flag, three pushes down, one pullback, two pullback. And then today, bar three and a wedge bull flag. And then we've got a bull breakout and follow through buying. A big bull bar, probably always in long. We're trying to resume up after the bear channel. So always in long traders buy that, they buy that. They buy another bull close here. They buy below the bear bar, getting the reversal will fail. They buy the high one buy on the resumption up. They buy the breakout of this pullback. However, whenever you see a strong rally, another buy climax, another buy climax. And a leg one, leg two, and a buy setup for leg three, you have to be thinking about the possibility of a parabolic wedge top and an early high of the day. When you get that third push up and you see a particularly big bull bar closing on its high, you got to be thinking that it might be an exhaustive end of a strong rally. And that rally might be a bull leg in what could become a trading range. It could also be the end of a rally that leads to a bear trend. Yesterday we had a bear channel. And so we tried to break below and we instead reversed up pretty strongly. We would say So we have a failed top and a breakout. So you got to be thinking after the breakout, we might get a second leg up. So we had a top attempt and a bull breakout, and you typically get a second leg up when you have a top that fails. However, that leaves us with three consecutive biclimaxes here, or you can say this one has two in it, one and then two, and then a smaller one here, and then a bull flag, you got to be concerned that we might get a third run up and then a reversal down and an early high of the day. When I see this, I'm thinking this is more likely a bull leg in what will become a trading range or a possible high of the day and a reversal down. In any case, you have to be prepared to sell. You could sell below that bear bar. You can even sell above this bull bar, betting that it's a parabolic wedge top, probably not going much higher. Higher probability to wait for a decent reversal down and follow through bar or a breakout. Here we have an attempt at a bull flag and we get a breakout and a follow through bar. So this is a sell to close sell off. And then this is really important. A big bear break up with a decent follow through bar. This might end up being a measuring gap for a second leg down. So you can sell that close, higher probability to sell here, or we got a low two bear flag. Bull bar, first leg up, and then a bear bar, and then a second leg up. So this is a low two sell, and then more sell to close, sell off. Typically in a parabolic wedge opening reversal, when it starts to reverse, it goes down in a fairly tight channel for five or ten bars. If instead it goes five or six bars and then sideways or bounces a little bit, then it's probably not going to be a parabolic wedge top and a bear trend. But this is typical when you are going to get a bear trend. You get reversal down in five, ten bars or more in a fairly tight channel. And then you start getting bear breakouts. Again, I think it's sell to close in here, sell to close in here, and then clearly sell to close down there. Another example of a parabolic wedge top. A big bull bar and then a bear bar. Big bull bar and a doji. And then another two bar breakout. So it's basically a spike for the first push up and then second push and third push. So you've got to be thinking this could be a parabolic wedge high of the day. Very tight spike and channel bull trend. So spike and channel. And then a decent sell signal bar. Not particularly high probability sell. More likely we'll go sideways. But it's a decent sell because the potential reward is much bigger than the risk. So you can sell there or you can wait for this and that. Waiting for these closes higher probability of more down. But whenever you wait for higher probability there's usually less profit remaining and your stop is further away. So there's greater risk. Either way is okay. The early entry with lower probability and lower risk. In other words, lower probability, better risk reward. Or the later entry where you get higher probability, but you pay for it with worse risk reward. Look what happened at the new low of the day. Big reversal up. A lot of times when you have these parabolic wedge sell offs and you get to the low of the day, you do get a big reversal up. The market's deciding whether it's going to fall for a measured move based upon the height of the buy climax. Or instead either go sideways or bounce in a bull channel, which it did here. For the bulls, it's a double bottom and a buy. Very tight bear channel. Most likely minor reversal and sideways for five or 10 bars. But it is an okay buy. So if you have a bear breakout and a pullback, we have a bear breakout, but we have a doji here. Basically, doji is here. And we know traders bought here and they bought here at the open. When the market opened, they bought and the market went up. So they're probably going to buy again here. This bull bar is a pullback from this bear breakout, but we're in a buy zone and it's a bad looking sell signal bar. So probably bulls will place limit orders to buy the low of that bar. So that's another chance to buy. Or you could buy with a stop above the high of the bar. Double bottom pullback. So three pushes down. This little tail is one, two, three. This is really not a push down, but it's still three lows, a low here, low there, low there. And to me, that is a type of a triangle breakout mode situation. So we have a double bottom, a reversal up and a pullback from the double bottom. Reasonable candidate for the low of the day. On the way up, we got a low one. And look at this rally. Where are the consecutive big bull trend bars? We got a bull bar doji, bull bar tail, and then doji. And three bull bars shrinking bodies. So this looks like a bull leg in a trading range. So low one, possible low two. 50% pullback of the bear leg. You can also call it a double top bear flag, a wedge bear flag. Wedge one, two, three, or one, two, three. However, in any case, this looks like we're going sideways to down. So that would be another sell. Starting to resume up. Where are the consecutive big bear bars? All right. Bear bar, bull bar, bear bar, bull bar, bear bar, doji. So this looks like a bear leg in a trading range. However, at this point, low, higher, low, higher, low. We may be in a bull channel. And we may start to get higher high, higher high, higher high. And higher low, higher low, higher low. This is a reasonable buy for a double bottom. Even though the bottoms are not at the same price. It's a double bottom, higher low. And a weak sell off. Bulls will buy above the bull bar for the reversal up. And then up here, first push up or first push up, second push up, third push up, or first push and then bear bar, second push, then bear bar, and third push. Slightly higher high. This looks like trading range price action. So just like bears sold above this bar and made money, they'll probably sell above this bar and make money. Especially given that there are different ways to draw a wedge bear flag. And then we've got a bear bar closing on its low. So traders will sell below that low, hoping for a swing down, knowing that more likely they'll only get a scalp. Reversing up, I would not necessarily buy above the bear bar, but above the bull bar or the second bull bar, that would be a higher probability buy. Higher low, higher low, higher low, higher low. High, higher high, higher high. Clearly in a bull channel. And some traders like to buy with limit orders below bars. Other traders buy as the market is reversing up. And then here, first push up, second push up, third push up. We're trying to break above the bull channel. Tried once, tried twice, and then bear bars, and then a second entry short here. That's a good location to exit longs or even to go short for a scalp down at the end of the day. A wedge lower high. One, two, three, so a wedge. Lower high. And a second entry cell. First reversal down. Second reversal down. Now, parabolic wedges are not only up, they can also be down. And different ways to look at this. First leg down ended with this doji, or that doji. And then a second leg down, and then a third leg down. Three bar cell climax. Cell climax. Cell climax. Cell climax. Whenever you get a series of three or four consecutive cell climaxes on the open, you have to be thinking about an opening reversal. A parabolic wedge. Cell off. And then a reversal up. Cell climax. Now, think about this. No matter where you sell in here, it's clearly sell to close. If you're selling here, your stop is way up here. And if you're a bear, your stop is far away. You're expecting a little bit more down, not necessarily a lot more down. And with your stop so far away, you have to reduce your risk. And the easiest way to do that is to buy back some of your shorts. And after consecutive cell climaxes, you're not expecting a lot more down. So you start to buy back your shorts, and that can cause a reversal. Because of the potential of this being a parabolic wedge bottom on the open, it could end up being the low of the day. Maybe if you're selling down here, you could use a tighter stop at the top of a big cell climax here. But when you've got the biggest looking bear breakout, and it's occurring as the third sell climax in the trend, you have to be thinking that, yeah, there might be one more leg down, but probably not two or three legs down. This is probably the next to the final leg in the bear trend. And then we have an II bear flag here. So you're going to be thinking it's a potential final bear flag. Yes, you can sell, but you have to be ready for a reversal up. And if you're ready for that, and you see a pretty good looking bold reversal bar like this, you can buy. First reversal up in a very tight bear channel, probably minor. So it might go up five or 10 bars. Here it might have gone up 15 bars. And then it probably will test back down and then try to form a major trend reversal. Tried to form one here. Failed. Got a second leg down. Tried again here. And it was successful. A pretty decent buy above that full reversal bar after the parabolic wedge bottom and a fairly tight stop. Another thing about this, the bears who sold anywhere up here or even down here, they were surprised by the size of this. And they're going to be pretty eager to take profits. They see it as an unusual gift, a big gift. The market is suddenly giving it a lot of profit very quickly. So they're going to be looking to take profits. And as I said, after a parabolic sell climax, a parabolic wedge bottom, you have to be thinking that the market will probably go up for at least a couple of legs and at least 10 bars. One leg pullback, two pullback, three. So a wedge lower high. Tight bull channel, probably not much down, but probably still a second leg down because it's probably a minor reversal after a tight bear channel. Once the market is clearly in control by the bears, bears are going to bet that the first reversal up will not get too far. And then we've got a bull trend here. Not especially big bars, okay bars, but then a pretty good bear bar and another bear bar. We've got a micro double bottom and a higher low. Only two or three bars down and only four or five bars up. Not enough bars for a major reversal. So yes, this could be a higher low major trend reversal, but it's probably a higher low minor trend reversal, which means probably a bull leg in a trading range. Traders will be looking for a reversal down. Because it's probably a bull leg in a trading range, traders would sell below a strong bear bar here. Three or four bull bars might get a little bit more up. So maybe they sell here. They'll also start selling with limit orders above bars, betting that if it's a bull leg in a trading range, selling above the prior highs makes sense because we're probably going to go down before too long. The best stop is probably above the top of the bear leg, bear trend. That has the highest probability of being successful. However, it also has the greatest risk. Above this lower high, above the sell climax are also alternative places where you can put a stop. If it's going to be a bear trend, if we're going to get a lower high, new low, lower high, new low and channeled down, it should not go above the high of that sell climax. Any reasonable stop is good. All three of these are reasonable stops. And the wider stop loses more when it's hit, but it loses less often. It gets hit less often. And after you take 10 similar trades like this, your results will be the same whether you use the tighter stop, lose a little bit more often or the wider stop lose less often. So any reasonable stop is okay. Here, we pull back in the open. We have a bi-climax and a pullback, bi-climax and a pullback, bi-climax, pullback, bi-climax. You can say four consecutive bi-climaxes. One, two, three, four. Or you can say this is a strong enough breakout. So we start the count right here. One, two, three. So this is a potential parabolic wedge top. However, remember what I said. If it is going to be a parabolic wedge top, you want it to fall in a fairly tight bare channel. Instead, this went sideways in a fairly tight channel. And that reduces the probability that this is going to be a top. It increases the possibility that we're going to go sideways and get trend resumption up. Look at this rally. We're trying to resume up, but small doji's overlap, pullback, every few bars. Does this look like the resumption of a bull trend or does this look like a bull leg and what will end up as a trading range? Just like this does not look like a bear trend. It looks like a bear leg in a trading range. This is probably a bull leg in a trading range. We're getting some gaps. This pullback did not fall below that high. So that's a sign of a strong bull trend. This sell-off went mostly sideways instead of down. Good for the bulls. And remember earlier I said, if you are getting a tight channel down after a parabolic wedge top and you get a little breakout, it increases the chances that you're going to get trend resumption up. Here we got a gap between this high and that low. Does not matter that we went above here. You can say it's a negative gap with this high and that low. In any case, it's a gap. We might soon get trend resumption up. You can call it negative gaps. Slight overlap between this pullback and this breakout point. Slight overlap between this pullback and that buy signal or high. It's still a sign of strength and it still increases the chances that we're going to go higher. Look at the size of the pullbacks. We have a parabolic wedge top and you could sell here, sell there. If you're selling with a stop, are you making money here? If you're selling with a stop, are you making money? If you're selling with a stop, are you making money? No. So it's impossible for the bears to make a profit because the pullbacks are so small. You got to be thinking that. We've got a combination of a weak looking rally. Looks like a leg in a trading range, but all the pullbacks are small and we're forming gaps and negative gaps. Those are the ingredients of a small pullback bull trend. I would be looking to buy getting that we'll get higher prices. We'll be mixing today. Also, links were profits right down and regulators. We have a new slip profit from Q�'n topatti Stream, which will measure the temperature, and you mentioned below, make a fickle Tudoقة-Burbing price sum bars, probably sellers above that high. So we had a strong rally yesterday and look at the follow through today. It looks like either a bare leg or a tight trading range, not high probability for the bulls yet. Traders will sell below that bare bar, failed breakout above yesterday's high, or they'll sell closes, betting on at least a little bit more down. Now I said after two big bare bars, probably at least a little bit more down, bears will place a limit order as soon as that bar closes, a limit order to sell its high and they'd get filled when this bar traded above that bar's high. So that's at least a scalp. For the bulls, we got a leg down, a pullback, a second leg down. We have a small double bottom, it's a high two bull flag right here. So that is an okay buy. And this is also a small high two. High one, failed, high two here. So you could buy that or buy this. Stop for the bulls is still down here. In any case, if you did short, I probably would get out above this bar or above that bar or above this bar because this does not look like it's going down very far. It looks like it's going more sideways. You got to look to the left. And here's the context. A very strong rally. We gapped up and we reversed down, but it does not appear that we're falling very far, very fast. So this might end up as a bull flag. So this is a little bit more. Not yet high probability to buy. Higher probability to wait to see if we do get the bull breakout. But if you shorted, I would get out of the shorts. Again, we have a small double bottom and a breakout below the double bottom reverses up. This is a type of wedge bottom. One, two, three. Or you can simply call it a double bottom, which is a type of high two bull flag at the moving average. A reasonable buy on the open. Consecutive big bear bars on the open. Always in short, but a very tight bull channel. Probably not much down. Probably buyers around the moving average. Traders will look for a reversal up from support. And one of the most common supports on the open is the moving average. A sell off down to support, opening reversal, and then a rally from there. And this little sell off could put a tail on the bottom of a bull trend day. So if you look at the daily chart, you might see a little tail on the bottom. In fact, most bull bars on the daily chart have tails on the bottom and they are created by initial sell offs. Most big bear trend days have little tails on top. They're usually created by early rallies that reverse down. Bull break out, so a spike. And now we have a pullback. So maybe we'll channel up. And traders will look to buy pullbacks. Another pullback to the moving average. Here, near the moving average. Traders keep buying as the pullback reverses up. Take a look at this. Pretty strong by the close finish yesterday. And today we have a gap up. But first three bars doji, first five out of six bars doji, and then more doji's here. Probably sideways until we get near the moving average. And you can see we've got a tight trading range. No rush to buy. You could buy above this bull bar, or you could wait. No good buy signal bar here despite a double bottom in a small high two, high one, high two. Higher probability to wait for the breakout or follow through or when it becomes by the close. So we've got a bull breakout of a double bottom bull flag near the moving average. Probably at least two legs up. And since the market usually has a swing beginning in the first hour or two, and the swing usually lasts two to three hours, this could be the start of a trend up for the next two to three hours. And in fact, it turned out to be the start of a trend that lasted for the remainder of the day. None of this looks particularly strong. We have a lot of doji's, tight trading range, tight trading range, tight trading range. But high, higher, higher, higher low, higher lows, higher low. We're still on a bull channel. You've got to be really careful taking shorts. The pullbacks are not very big. It's better to wait for a pullback, a reversal attempt, and bet that it will fail, and then buy the reversal up. Every attempt to reverse down is another bull flag. So attempt to reverse down, bull flag. Look to buy the reversal up, either here or here, or after this strong two bar reversal on the failed breakout below the moving average. Bears have two bear bars. Normally, traders would like to see three or four consecutive bear bars before they conclude that the bears are winning. And because of that, a lot of times when there are two consecutive bear bars, bulls will start buying closes. So they'll buy the closes of that second bear bar, betting that the bears will not get three. And then also, they'll be buying above bull bars on the resumption up here or above that bull bar. Now, we tried to break to the downside, but where is the follow through? So we got one bear breakout, but no follow through bar. Instead, we got a reversal up. And in fact, this is slightly above that low. So we're getting a reversal up and it's a double bottom higher low. It's better to bet that the bears will fail and that we're going to go higher. And we got a buy the close bull trend near the end of the day. Traders were buying closes. After five or six, by the close bars, traders have to be ready for reversal down. And usually you get out below the first bear bar. A similar situation, a gap up and then sideways to the moving average. But in this particular case, it stayed sideways in the tight range all day. Looks like a good start for the bulls. Three bull bars, four bull bars. I think it's always in long on the close of this bar. And then it looks like we have a buy the close rally. The bars are small. Plus we have that tail here and tail here. Now we have a bear bar. This is probably going to result in a tight trading range that will go sideways to down to the moving average. And it did. It ended up in a very tight trading range. Tried to break below the moving average, follow through, but reversed up on the next bar. Consecutive bull bars, always in long. You can buy above the high of that inside bar. Here we have a decent sell signal bar. A bear bar closing on its low. Micro double top here and here. Small double top. And the rally is weak enough, especially with this tail here and then the small bars are now a bear bar. We're probably going sideways to down to the moving average. So the bulls have bought here will probably get out below that bear bar or anywhere in here. But look at the sell off. Where are the consecutive big bear trend bars? They got a decent bear bar here, but not consecutive big bear bars. Even though we sold off for a couple of hours, it's more likely a bear leg than what will end up as a trading range. And it did. Bulls see a wedge bull flag. Three or four pushes down. One, two, three, and then four. They'll buy the reversal up. But stop is below this, the bottom of the bull leg. They're going to see a double top, lower high, major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout. Double top, lower high, and a tight trading range. 40% chance we're going to get a swing down. I mean 60% chance we will not. And here we've got the breakout and follow through, but then a reversal up. And a slightly higher low double bottom with the low of the day, the open of the day. So bulls will buy reversal up. Also a gap bar, a gap between the high of this bar and the moving average. After the market has been above the moving average for 20 or 30 bars, probably will lead to at least a minor reversal up. Maybe a measured move up. Yesterday we sold off strongly and then we ended up with a bull channel into the close. Bull channel is a bear flag, so you've got to be thinking about a bear breakout. We tried to get a bull breakout above the bull channel. 75% chance it will reverse down to the bottom of the channel within about five bars. Here it reversed down within a couple of bars. Also we've got a bi-climax here, a pair of very big bull trend bars. It could be a measuring gap, but because it's breaking above the top of a bull channel, you've got to be thinking that it might be a trap. For an opening reversal down, two legs up, one pullback, two. It's always in long, but this is dangerous. It's possibly a second leg trap, one pullback, two. And since we're getting a bull breakout above the bear flag and 75% of the time it reverses down, traders will look for a sell signal bar like this bear bar. And they'll either get out of longs or look to sell. Always in long, but we've reversed back into the channel. We've fallen for about six bars or so. I would wait instead of buying this. We have a tight bear channel and a target below. Also, anytime you're in a fairly broad channel, you have to assume the pullbacks will be deep. You can see this pullback retraced about 75% of the bull leg. And this one retraced more than 50% of that bull leg. This one will probably get down at least to the bottom of this buy climax. This is a reasonable buy. Bulls will buy that close. They'll buy that close. Most bulls would get out below that bear bar because of the failed breakout above the bull channel. But it's okay to hold long and bet that the channel will continue up. However, we could get a very deep pullback. So if you're buying this bull close, betting that you can buy more lower and it will get back here, allowing you to get off break even on your first entry and with a profit on your second. If you do take that buy, you need an appropriate stop below the bottom of the most recent bull leg. Putting it below the buy climax, I think is not good. I think you need it below the most recent measure, higher low. Because it's a decent buy the close rally, traders will look to buy above a bull bar. Would they buy here? Two legs down, one pullback, two. Well, very tight bear channel, so not good. What about buying this? Leg one, pullback two, micro double bottom. I think this is an okay buy. You're buying above a bull bar. You have two legs down, even though the channel is tight. But if you do buy here, your stop is still down here. In general, whenever you have a buy the close market and then a big reversal, a deep pullback, you are looking to buy above a bull bar, either here or here or here. However, you want the second entry to be at least two or three times bigger than a minimum scalp. Your goal on the second entry is to make a profit, get out on the first entry, break even on the first entry, and with a profit on the second. And in general, I want the second entry to be at least two or three times the size of a minimum scalp. For example, in the E-mini, the minimum scalp is one point. If I'm going to be buying above a bull bar, adding to my position, I want the second entry to be about three points below the first entry. And it's a channel. The traders sell every new high. This is a new high. You've got some bulls getting out here, break even on the first entry. Others will wait for a reversal down. Pretty good bull breakout, probably at least a little bit more up. And then we have a second entry short, both with bare sell signal bars. I think this is a good exit place, especially since there's not much left to the day. In this particular video, I gave several day trading examples. This is Al Brooks. Thank you again for watching the Brooks Trading Course. And this video had swing trading examples. Many of the swing trades turned out to be scalps, which is always the case. But the setups were for swing trades. The set ups were for swing trades. The set ups were for swing trades. The set ups were for swing trades. I see it as well. The set ups have been on sale. It is almost their roast te drives. I see there's a massive prevailing trading combo that ls up Vul as a AND-arm. Under all, the Köーンinski key makes them forside budgets. I see a lower set up for swing trades in a Older 선생詞 area.