 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is a video on how to scale into trades. It's the second of three videos. In this video, I'm going to be talking about scaling into a losing position. So if you take an entry and the market goes against you, you can add to your position under certain circumstances if you manage the trade correctly. When a person puts on a trade and it becomes a losing trade, a lot of times traders will scale in, not so much to make a profit, but to avoid a loss. And there are many ways to do it. You can buy at a fixed interval down and multiples of that. For example, in the E-mini, if a scalp size is one point, you might buy more. Let's say you buy high and the market starts to go against you. You can buy more. One times a scalp size. In other words, one point down, two points down, three points down. If you're trading a Forex market, you could buy a multiple of the minimum scalp size there, which is 10 pips. You buy, you buy more, 10 pips lower, 20 pips lower. Other traders buy once. Let's say you take the absolute worst buy and you buy up here. And you're confident that your premise is good, that the market will go higher before it falls to the bottom of the major higher low. Then some traders, instead of buying at a fixed interval down, will buy at a percentage. And the most popular percentage is 50%. The strong bull breakout began here. This is a major higher low, led to a strong rally and a new high. So if the bull trend is intact, then any pullback, no matter how deep, should stay above that higher low. Traders put their stop there. And as long as it stays above there, they're willing to hold onto their position and even add on. For example, as the market's turning up again, you have a bull trend here and a pullback and you could buy anywhere. And let's say you happen to buy the worst price. Let's say you buy the close of this small bull doji bar. Now that follow through next bar and then a reversal down here. A lot of traders would look at that and say, well, strong enough, big up, big down, big confusion. Maybe we'll fall for a couple of legs down. Maybe I'll just get out and I'll wait to buy when it reverses back up. And that's, that is an okay approach. So you do an early exit and don't wait for your stop to hit. And then other traders will look at it and say, yeah, I know I bought high, but it could have kept going up. And the momentum up is strong enough so that even if it sells off, I'm pretty confident that it's going to get back to that price. So if I add on somewhere like on a reversal up, maybe above a bull bar like that or above this or above that, and then it gets back to my original entry price. I get out of my first buy break even and then with a profit on my lower buy. And if the reversal up is strong enough, I'll hold the entire position until the market starts to reverse down. And then I'll make a profit on my first buy and my second buy, wherever my second body is here, here or here. So let's say you buy that close, you buy that close and it turned out to be the highest close right before a reversal. And let's say you decide that as long as it stays above this low, the premise is valid that it will get back to that close at some point. And you're willing to scale in lower. Most traders will scale into a losing position only one or two times. Some traders will scale in many times, but most traders will only look for a single or a double entry. For example, you could buy over here or you can wait for two legs down, one pull back to a two bar reversal and a higher low. Or now we have a double bottom higher low and you could buy above that bull bar or above this bull bar. So if you buy here, here are two options. Most traders would take one, but not both. Also, most traders do not want to hold through a pullback this deep. However, it is okay. The math is okay. As long as we're holding above this low and the reversal is down, do not have a lot of follow through. Chances are the sell off is a bare leg in a trading range or simply a bull flag. And in either way, it should get back up to that price. Every trader should go into every trade with a plan. And as long as the initial premise is still valid, they can hold on to their position. But if the market is behaving in a way that's not consistent with their position, they should exit. So if your plan is failing, you get up. Now, if you buy high and the market immediately reverses down, your minimum goal is to avoid a loss. And to avoid loss, if you buy here and you buy more, let's say here, and you get out in between the two entries, you avoid a loss. You'll lose a certain amount on the first entry and you'll make the exact same amount on the second entry. So that is the minimum goal. And some traders do that. Most traders, when they're scaling in, are not trying to avoid a loss. At a minimum, they're trying to get out break even on the first entry and then with a profit on their second entry, their lower entry. In general, you want to make at least a minimum scalp on your second entry. And that means your second entry has to be at least a minimum scalp below your first. So if you're trading a stock and your minimum scalp for stock is 10 cents, then this entry has to be at least 10 cents below that. If you're trading the E-mini and the minimum scalp is a point, then these entries, whichever one you take, has to be at least a point below that. If you're trading in the Forex market and the minimum scalp is 10 pips, then this has to be at least 10 pips below that. Otherwise, you don't take the trade. You just wait and you hold on to that original position. I said the minimum that a scale-in trader wants is one times the minimum scalp. Ideally, you want your second position to be two or three times greater than the minimum scalp. So in a Forex market, if you're buying here, you'd rather be buying 30 pips lower here, not just 10 pips lower. E-mini, you'd rather be buying three or four points lower, not just one point lower. A lot of traders are comfortable, even with this bad entry, they did not know it was going to be a bad entry. It turned out to be a bad entry, but a lot of traders are comfortable just relying on their stock. They don't worry about getting the best entry. They just want to take any entry that makes sense and buying anytime in a bull trend makes sense. So you just put your stock below the most recent major higher low, the bottom of this bull breakout, and trust that the market will not quite get there. If your stock is far away and you're planning to add on lower, in general, you want your initial position to be no more than a third, maybe a half of the maximum acceptable risk. You know, I'll talk about specifics, but let's say you normally risk six points in the E-mini. Right? And let's say this is six points below. You could trade one contract and not scale in. But if you're thinking about scaling in anywhere through here, this position should be maybe a third to a half of your normal position size. So if you normally trade 10 contracts, this should be three, four or five contracts, allowing you to add on lower. For example, let's say the stock here is 50 ticks below the entry price. It could be $50. If it's a stock, it could be 50 pips. If it's a Forex market. But let's just say the sake of argument in this particular example, let's say you buy here and your stop is right below here. And that's 50 ticks below. Let's say you do not like to risk more than 20 ticks on any trade that you typically take. That means that if you're now risking 50 ticks and you normally only want to risk 20 ticks, then you have to be trading maybe a 25 to a 50% normal position size. So if you normally trade 10 contracts in the E-mini, I know most traders do not do that. But if they did and they're now risking two and a half times normal, they should only trade two or three contracts. If they buy up here and put their stock down here, you have to adjust your position size based upon your risk. Well, let's say the bull bought one unit up here at the close of the follow through bar. You get a bull breakout bar, you have a bull follow through bar and stop goes down here. So he buys up there and you put the stop down there below the bottom of the major higher low. He could put it down here as well. The beginning of the bull trend. Both are acceptable. If that trade of bought here and he's thinking about adding on, he wants his next entry to be at least one to two times the size of an average scalp. So if an average scalp in the E-mini, the average minimum scalp is one point, then the bull would prefer to put his second position on his second part on two, three or four points below his first. In general, he also wants the second position to be at least a third of the way down to his stop. So he might look at this and say two legs down, one pull back, two, maybe buy above this bull bar. And that is acceptable. The problem with that is the channel down at that point is very tight. So chances are there'll be at least one more leg down. But it is okay to buy here and then buy more above that bull bar, hoping that it's the end of the correction. And if he was willing to scale in a second time, he would look to buy at least one point below that, one point the minimum scalp. And he'd like to buy above a bull bar. So either there or above here or above there. And if he's very aggressive, let's say he bought one part here, second part there, a third part there, he might even buy more here. But this is essentially the same price as that. You're increasing your position, but you're not buying at a lower price. Most traders would not do that. If you start to see a strong reversal up, the bar is getting bigger, closes on the high. You could hold your position until there's a possible reversal of the trend. Here we got a buy climax and a bear bar and a failed breakout. So some traders would buy here, buy, let's say the trader bought here and bought more here. So he bought three parts, he would get out below that bear bar after the buy climax and the failed breakout above this high. A lot of traders, they buy here and let's say they buy here. They're just trying to get out, break even at their first entry. And that's because they look at this and say, okay, bull trend. Uh oh, the selling is too much. The pullback is too deep. Probably now instead of a bull trend, it's a trading range. And if it's a trading range, it might not get much above this current high of the trading range. And therefore, if I buy here and now conclude the market center trading range, I want to sell high at the top of the range, maybe at that close. So I get out, break even on my first trade and then with a profit on my second trade. If the premise is still valid, the trader looks at this and sees the market accelerating upward here, four consecutive boulevards, five boulevards, and then six boulevards. He might decide, well, I'm not going to get out here. I'm just going to stay on in the position until I get a reversal down. You know, in that case, he could get out at the high with a profit on this first entry and a profit on the second entry. In general, if the trader is sufficiently disappointed by this, you know, he would get out break even at his first entry and with a profit on this one. But this is a special case. The market started to accelerate up after a double bottom higher low. Chances are, we're going to go higher. A lot of traders wouldn't care. They would just, they would say, okay, it looks like a trading range. Not that great a rally, pretty protracted sell off. It's probably going to have a hard time getting much above this. I'm just going to place a limit order to sell out of my entire position at that price. So I get out break even on my first buy from over here. And then I get out with a profit on this buy. Sometimes traders will look at this and say, wow, this is down 20, 30, 40 bars. That's much further down than I wanted. I'm just going to dump the entire position at break even. So there's first entries here. Second entry, let's say is here. This is the midpoint between his two entries. So he'll just place a limit order to get out here with this much profit on his first and that much loss on the second. So he's break even on the entire trade. That is acceptable. And whenever you feel sufficiently disappointed by what the market's doing, it's never a bad thing to just get out break even. The bulls who bought this rally, especially those who bought here, we're not expecting the pullback to last this deep almost all the way down to their stop. And for this many bars. That means the trading range is more likely than a bull trend. Because of that, the bulls see a double bottom here, neckline here, maybe a measured move up. They see a bigger double bottom here to here. You know, maybe we break about this neckline and go for a measured move up. That is unlikely when the pullback is as deep as this. This means the upside is probably going to be limited. So a trading range is more likely than a break above this high, the neckline of this double bottom. I know it's a higher low, but it's still, as far as computers are concerned, it's a type of double bottom. You can also call it a triangle. One push, two pushes, three pushes. But sufficiently disappointing, a lot of bear bars, probably not going to be a big bull trend. This is a fairly big bull trend, but unlikely to go up for a measured move. So you've got a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. You get a bear trend here, a bull breakout and a double bottom. Again, since a lot of traders are going to scalp out at the first entry and they want to make a profit on their second entry, you want the second entry to be at least as big as the minimum scalp. In the mini, for example, you want this to be at least a point below that. And this obviously is several points below that. So it meets that minimum. You know, you don't want to be buying here and then buying more right here. If you're buying up here in the mini, you want to be buying preferably two, three or four points lower here, not one or two points. If you're buying in the Forex market on a chart like this, five minute chart, 15 minute chart, 60 minute chart. If you're buying here, you don't want this to be just 10 pips lower. After this many bars down, you'd want it to be, you'd prefer it to be 20 or 30 pips lower so that you make 20 or 30 pips on the mini. So you get up to 30 pips on this buy and you get up to break even on that buy. Let's look at this again. Trader buys that close. And let's say this blue box is what you normally risk. So you get in there and normally would not risk more than that. But look where the stop is. The stop is almost three times your normal risk. So if your stop is three times your normal risk, you have to trade only one third your position size. And let's say you bought again somewhere in here. Let's say you bought right there. Right? And this is your normal risk, the size of that rectangle. And since your stop is down here, on this second entry, you're risking two times your normal risk. So you get a total of five rectangles. So if your position is buying here and buying more here, your total risk is five times normal. And that means that your positions here and here should be no more than maybe 20% of your normal position size. If you cannot do that, if you cannot trade large enough to do this trade, you don't do the trade. Whenever the market tells you what you have to do and your account size or your motions don't work for what you have to do, you do not take the trade. So let's say you can only trade two contracts in the E-mini. You can only take this trade if your normal position size is five or 10 contracts. And if your normal position size is not five or 10 contracts, just don't take the trade. Don't worry about it. There'll be other trades. Total risk if you buy here and buy more here is five times normal risk. Your total position between these two has to be about 20% of your normal position size. So maybe 10% here, 10% there, but you got to trade really, really small. And if you cannot trade really small because of your account size or emotions, just wait for a different trade. Again, if you're buying anywhere in this bull trend, it doesn't matter if you're buying here or here, the stop is still down here or here. So the market does not care where you get in. All it cares about is where the stop belongs. Now I said some traders may not want to hold through a protracted reversal down. In other words, they put this as a catastrophic stop in case the market just collapses. They want to make sure they get up without too big of a loss, but they have no intention of ever letting this stop get hit. Well, they can look at this and they can say, okay, maybe a parabolic wedge, one, two, three, maybe two legs up, one, two, three, second leg trap. And we've got a bear bar here. Maybe I'll just get out below the bear bar or big reversal bar, big up, big down, probably a second leg down. Maybe I'll get out here. A buy set up or pull back. But after two bars and a big bear bar, probably sellers above here and then a second leg down. So maybe I can exit my long here. So buy here and I'll just get out with a loss there or below the low one or below the low two. Those are all reasonable things to do. You can stop yourself out, for example, here or here or right here. So those are all reasonable stops. And the other reasonable stop is right here. And anything in between, I call it a skunk stop, right? Because it stinks and it's in the middle and the result will be it'll kill your account. If you decide not to take one of the early exits and you decide you don't want to take the late exit, the far exit. And you said, well, maybe I'll get out below this far or maybe I'll get out if it breaks up below that far. These are losing strategies. In between the quick exit and the distance stop. And these are these are bad exits. You're in the middle of a trading range and the market's falling below a higher low. Chances are there are more buyers than sellers there falling below a higher low in a trading range. Chances are there are more buyers here than sellers. So you don't want to be doing the opposite of what most traders are doing. Those are skunk stops. You either get out early or you rely on your stop or you wait until the market's clearly bearish. You just don't stick a stop somewhere just because you cannot take the pain anymore. Because it's a losing strategy. You don't want to be doing the opposite of energy. In this video, I talked about scaling into losing positions. So if you enter a trade and the market goes against you and your premise is still valid. And if you're trading small enough and using the appropriate stop, you can add to your losing position. In an attempt to make a profit or at least to avoid a loss. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video is on scaling into trades. With the closing trades. Make strong notes on Salford, make those words biblical skills. And if you haven't been making a Nikon Damavis, you have to come as soon as possible in a bit. While the package comes up on living conditions, you are actually associated with motives.