 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading tight bear channels. If a channel is not particularly tight, sometimes bulls will buy and scale in lower. I think it's very important to pay attention to whether or not the bulls can make money. If it's difficult for the bulls to make money, you should not be buying. You should only sell. The market broke out a series of bear bars and then it pulls back. As soon as you pull back, then the market is in a channel phase. So a spike pullback and then a channel. Even though this is very, very tight here and it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart, on this chart, I would call it a very tight bear channel within a larger tight bear channel. What's happening here is that every new low bears are taking partial profits, taking partial profits, taking partial profits, and that's causing pullbacks. And inexperienced bulls are buying above all of these bars and losing money constantly. They're buying because the risk is small and beginners only think about risk. They don't think about probability. When the pullbacks only last a bar or two and do not go up very far, it's virtually impossible to make money. And therefore, traders should only sell. Once the bearers start to see little pullbacks, they begin to sell pullbacks and take profits at new lows. And the result is you keep getting small pullbacks. You have inexperienced bulls buying below bars hoping for a reversal and they keep getting trapped. Or they'll buy above a bull bar betting on a reversal and they keep getting trapped. Not enough buyers following them and the market continues down. Most bulls, most experienced bulls are unwilling to buy these reversals because they know the pullbacks are only lasting a bar or two. And do not go up high enough to make money. Nobody's holding on to longs for swings up and nobody's buying more higher. Therefore, these buys are all terrible. And in fact, if anything, you should be looking to sell exactly where you see buy setups. The pullbacks are too small. A small pullback bear trend, a very tight channel. You should only sell. When a channel is tight, you can only sell. When a channel is tight, every reversal is probably going to be minor. Until you get a very strong minor reversal, you have to bet that every reversal is going to be minor. Even the first strong reversal probably is minor and the bulls will need a major trend reversal. A test back down to the low and then a reversal up from there. This is a minor reversal. Every one of these reversals is minor. This is a very strong minor reversal. When you finally get a strong minor reversal, then the bulls will start looking for a swing up. Every bear trend is constantly forming wedge bottoms. Every bull trend is constantly forming wedge tops. A wedge bottom does not mean that the reversal will be major. When the wedge is this small and the channel is this tight, it's a minor reversal. And it will lead to lower prices. Every new low, you can keep redrawing wedges. So one, two, three. You break to a new low. One, two, three. It doesn't matter. When the channel is tight, wedges are not reversals. They'll lead to bear flags and not bull trims. On a small timeframe chart, this is a five minute chart, but on a smaller timeframe chart, you can look at this and say, ah, it's a wedge bottom. And we're getting a bear breakout below the wedge bottom. 75% chance you will get a reversal up to the top of the channel right here. You might be able to trade it on a one minute chart. I would recommend against it when the five minute channel is this strong. However, on the five minute chart, remember the target from the reversal up from the bottom of the channel is a test of the top of the channel. If you're buying on a stop above the high of this bull reversal bar, you're already at the target. Realistically, it's probably not going to go much above your entry price. And therefore, you're probably going to lose money. In addition, whenever the market is in a strong bear trend, you should not be buying at all. Some bulls will start buying with limit orders when you start getting pretty good size minor reversals. However, you should never be buying with a stop order when the market is in a tight channel because the market is only going to reverse up for a bar, maybe two bars and not high enough up to make money. Remember, it's a small pullback channel. Pullbacks are small. If you're buying with a stop, you're buying reasonably far, relatively far above the low. And odds are it's not going to go much higher. Every breakout becomes a channel and every channel eventually becomes a trading range. And sometimes when a market starts to enter a trading range in a very tight bear channel, bulls will start to buy new lows and start to scale in. Because when you start to get bigger pullbacks and more frequent pullbacks, the odds are the market will soon begin to enter a trading range. And if it's in a trading range, bulls can begin to make money by buying lows and scaling in lower. For example, we have a double bottom, two bull bars here, two bull bars here. And we have a micro double bottom here. We went up. We went up again. We're starting to get some two-sided trading. Some bulls will place limit orders to buy at the prior low and scale in more lower and then use a wide stop. Maybe a stop based upon a measured move down from this, maybe a little bit more than that. For example, the bars here are maybe four points tall, reasonably big bars. Instead of adding on one point below this low, a bull might buy more two points below and then more again, four points below and use a wide stop. Normally, you might risk four or five points, but when the bars are big like this and the range is big like this, you have to risk maybe double that. And instead of scaling in one point below, two points below with the bars big and the range big, you maybe scale in two and four points below. Some bulls will buy two or three times this way. Would they buy five or ten times this way? No. And if you're going to have to scale in five times, you have to assume that you're buying in a strong bear trend, not in a bear leg in what will become a trading range. You have to assume that you're going to lose money. So let's say you bought here and then scaled in a couple of times and used a stop ten points down. How does the math work out? Are you going to let this stop be hit? No, you're only going to be using the stop as a catastrophic stop. You're buying because you believe the market is going to go into a trading range and that new lows are going to come back above breakout points. We broke to a new low, went above the breakout point. Broke to a new low. You're betting that this breakout eventually will come back above this breakout point. But you know it could fall a number of bars first. You're going to use a wide stop. Again, you're not planning on letting that stop be hit. However, it's a catastrophic stop. Just in case the market keeps going down or in case you lose electricity or in case something happens and you have to run out and handle a family emergency. You want to have some stop there to avoid a catastrophe. In case the market just kept selling off all day. These scale end bulls know it's in a bear trend. However, they're hoping that this is a sign that the market is transitioning into a trading range. And it did. It did become a trading range. It took a lot of bars before it became clear. But some bulls will take a buy here, buy more two points lower, four points lower, and then place a limit order to get out at the original entry. They get out break even on their first trade, two points profit on their second, and then four points profit on their third. These bulls who bought at this low, two points lower and four points lower, ended up with a total of six points profit. On the other hand, if their stop was hit, and let's say they bought more two more times. So let's say they bought a first entry, a second entry, a third entry, a fourth entry, and then their stop was hit, they would lose a total of 28 points. That means the scale end bulls, the bulls who are buying and scaling in lower, were risking 28 points. It turns out in this particular case, they made six points, but they were risking 28 points. And how can the math possibly work out for that? You need a positive traders equation to take a trade. Scaling in increases your probability, which is good, but it also increases your risk. However, you probably need a probability of 80% or more to risk 28 points and end up making only six points on the trade. You pay for a great probability trade with bad risk reward, which usually means the reward is small and or the risk is big. In this particular case, you get both. You have a small reward relative to your risk and the risk is relatively large. Now, how can it work out? Well, if you're using that wide stop, most of your losses are going to be less than 28 points. Sometimes you'll take the buy at that low and it will immediately go up and you'll make two points immediately. Many of your winners are going to be more than two points. You might decide to hold on and maybe make four points or six points. Also, if the market's going down, a lot of times you will not scale in if you think the market is clearly always in short or strongly short. For example, if you have three strong bear bars closing on their lows, the odds are the market's going lower and you will not take the second buy and you might in fact exit the first buy with a two point loss. This is a very tight bear channel, but if it's a very broad bear channel, a skilled trader can win 90% of the time in a situation like this and his average win might be considerably bigger. It might be eight points, six points. Let's say it's eight points. If he takes 10 trades and he wins nine times, that would be a 72 point total profit. If he gets one loss, remember I'm talking about winning 90% of the time in a broad channel, his one loss of 28 points. is far less than his gain of 72 points. In a tight channel, that's not the case. In a broad channel, it's much easier to scale into longs and make money. It's much, much easier. The probability of making money is much greater. The rewards are bigger and the risk is smaller. In a tight channel, traders often enter and they quickly get disappointed and then they exit. around break even. For example, let's say you bought this low and the channel is very, very tight. You bought more here. You bought more here. And you're thinking, gosh, this is worse than I thought. And you decide that instead of trying to get out break even on your first entry and with a profit on your second and third entry, you'll find your average entry price and just trying to get out at your average entry price. And you'll be exiting to avoid a loss rather than to make a profit. The average win scaling in and a tight channel might only be two to four points. In this particular case, even if you win 90% of the time, 80% of the time, you're barely making enough money to make it worthwhile. Even great traders will rarely buy below bars and scale in when the channel is tight. That's the exact opposite of what you should be doing. You should be selling above bars betting that the reversals will fail. However, if you are able to do it and use the appropriate stop and scale in and the risk is not greater than a size that you can comfortably lose, then you can do it. Theoretically, it's possible. In the real world, it's a bad idea. You have to do it perfectly just to make a little amount of money. And if you do it anything less than perfect, you're going to lose money. So it's a bad strategy. So do not buy lows when you see a tight channel. I always pay attention in a bear trend to whether or not the bulls can make money. If they can make money, then the bull trend is probably transitioning into a trading range. And then I will start to look to buy low, sell high and scale. In addition to selling, obviously, if it's still in a bear trend, I want to be selling, but I can also add buying as well. If a bull bought this low and scaled in lower, his stop is going to get hit. He lost money. If he buys any of these lows and scales in, he's probably going to lose money. If he bought this low, he'd get filled here. He was able to make the scalp. Some of the bulls would therefore buy additional lows. With two or three big bear bars, I would not do it. But if a bull did it and used a wide enough stop, he would avoid a loss and he probably could make money, at least in theory. This is a strong enough minor reversal and went back above the breakout point to make bulls start buying prior lows. They'll buy this low for a scalp up. They'll buy this low for a scalp up. A bear breakout, but the bars are not all that big. And after the bear breakout, we got a bull bar. And then we have a second bull bar here closing on its high. We're getting tails below bars and we're getting reversals. Bear breakout, reversal. Bear breakout, reversal. So two-sided trading, the breakouts are getting weaker. A sign that the market might be transitioning into a trading range. I would say this is not easy for the bulls to make money. Buying here, buying here, buying here. However, if I did not buy, which I would not, and then I see the bulls ultimately did make money. And that's the second time they made money. They made money buying this low as well. Then I would start thinking that the market is probably transitioning from a tight bear channel into a trading range. And in addition to taking shorts, I'll start looking to buy at prior lows. The bulls know the market's still always in short all the way through here. It's still always in short, but the bulls are now starting to make money. And that's a sign that the market is transitioning into a trading range. Bare channel, very tight. Now, if you buy this low, maybe you'd make a little scallop. If you buy this low, it looks like you'd be trapped. There's a gap between this high and that low. Buy this low, maybe you'd make a little bit of money. Buy this low, you're trapped. It's very difficult for bulls to make money, even scaling in low and using wide stops. And whenever you look at the market, let's say you just turn on the screen right here. First thing you look at, you say, well, it's a very tight bear channel. I only want to sell. You might say, well, maybe I can buy, but let me first see if it's easy for bulls to make money. And you start seeing gaps. The pullbacks are only one bar, one bar, one bar. Very difficult for bulls to make money. And because it's difficult for bulls to make money, you should not try to buy. You should only be selling. Especially, you should sell every attempt to reverse up, betting that they'll fail. Here, if a bull bought this low, it turns out he could make a one point profit. And maybe you'd have to risk a few points to be safe. But he did theoretically make money buying at that low. Let's say a bull, therefore, buys at this low right here and scales in lower. One point lower, two points lower. It had to go above the breakout point. Here's the original entry for him to get out break even on his first trade. And with a profit on his second and third entry. But look what it did. It reached his entry price at that low and did not go above it. And therefore, he could not get out break even on this trade. And if it starts to turn down, he'll get out. Like maybe below the low of this bar. Which is a loss on this entry, a profit on this entry, break even on this entry. He'd get out, basically break even on the trade. However, he did not make money. And that is a warning to anyone looking to buy. Stop buying. Bulls are getting trapped and not making money. If the market is over here and I turn on my screen for the first time and I look at it, one of the first things I'm going to look at is whether or not the limit order bulls are making money scaling in below prior bars. And when I see that they're trapped, I know the market is probably going lower. So I'm only looking to sell. In actual fact, theoretically, if a person did buy at this low, they get filled here, buy more one point lower, buy more one point lower. He would have had a one point loss. If you get out here below this bull bar, he would have had a one point loss on his first entry, a two tick loss on his second, and a one point profit on his third. And his total for the three entries would be a two tick loss. If you're thinking about buying and you start looking at the screen over here or over here, you look back at things like this and say, boy, it's really difficult for the bulls to make money. You have to conclude that the bears are very strong and you should stop trying to buy. If it's too difficult for the bulls to make money, you can see these bulls only made one point. These bulls lost money. We're getting gaps. We have a gap here. Do not buy. As a bear, the market's clearly in a bear trend. I'm a bear. I'm looking to sell. I also want to pay attention to whether or not the bulls can make money. And if I see the bulls having a very difficult time to make money, and if I see them losing money, that makes me more eager to sell. So if I'm flat, I have to get short and I'll sell for any reason. The odds are if the bulls cannot make money, we're going lower, probably quite a bit lower. The bulls at this point saw how hard it was for the bulls earlier to make money, and therefore they become unwilling to buy. And the result is the reversals are very small and we have to go down a lot more before the bulls will find a price low enough that they'll buy. With fewer bulls willing to buy, the chance of a bear breakout becomes higher. Again, a bull buying at this low, scaling in lower, barely made money. He made a one point scalp on his second entry, break even on his first. We only got a two bar pullback. Eventually, the bulls stopped buying. It's repeatedly very difficult for them to make money. And if the bull stopped buying, you can quickly get a bear breakout and follow through. And once you get that, you're probably going to get at least a small second leg down. Maybe leg one, pull back leg two, very tight channel. More likely leg one, pull back leg two. That's the minimum goal. Some bulls who bought here might hold hoping for a test of this lower high or that lower high. But if they did, look what happened. We have a low one. This bar fell below that bar is low. And now we have a low two. Not only a low two, but the sell signal bar is a bear bar closing on its low. Any bull who bought for any reason, if he sees a low two and a very tight bear channel, and the sell signal bar is a bear bar closing on its low, the bulls are going to sell. The bears see that as well, and they're going to sell. And with the bulls and bears selling, pretty good chance you'll get a breakout and a profitable trade. That's one of the reasons why low two sell signals work so well, especially in very strong bear trends. The bulls give up. They'll hold for one attempt to resume the bear trend, but they will not hold for a second, especially if there's a strong bear bar closing on its low. Why do we have this big bull bar closing on its low and then a follow through bar? Because some bulls continue to hold and they're giving up. This is the final bulls giving up on these bars. You have a breakout and follow through. The bulls are giving up. The bears will sell, betting that any reversal up will be minor and we'll get at least a small second leg down. The bulls are selling out of their longs on these closes and the bears will sell those closes as well. Now, I said the odds were we'd get a second leg down. One, pull back two. You might get three, four, five legs down, but at a minimum you're going to get a second leg down. And because of that, some bulls will look to buy a reversal up from that second leg. Now, what do these bulls do? Their thought is, okay, there were limit order bulls who bought below this low. I don't have them indicated here. They're confident that eventually we'll get back above this low, even if we go down a long way. Some of these bulls will buy more above a bull bar, betting that it'll be the start of a reversal back above this breakout point. And then they can get out break even on their first bar right here. And then with a profit on their lower buy. Here's a bull bar. Are they going to buy above this bar? No, because we just had a bear breakout and the odds are we'll get a second leg down. After a second leg down, the bulls who bought at this low will buy above a bull bar and then try to get out break even on the first entry, which they were able to. And then with the scalpers profit on their second. Other bulls who did not pick any of these buys know that scale in bulls will buy above this bull bar, two legs down and a bull bar. And these bulls will also try to get out around that low. And guess what? The bears know the bulls who bought here and scaled in lower are going to sell if it gets back there. And the bulls who only bought here and not earlier are going to try to get out at that low as well. And therefore the bears will sell here because they know the bulls are selling and the bears will try to scalp a short. A bull reversal bar, bull bar. Terrible for the bulls that are losing money. Really hard for bulls to make money even buying with limit orders. Eventually the bulls stop trying. They know that when it's that difficult to make money, the market probably has to go lower before enough bulls will be willing to buy. As I said, to make money, they often have to scale in repeatedly and then the profit is small and the risk is big. And most bulls do not want to trade like that. That's terrible math. You have to do it perfectly or you're going to lose money. Very few people are perfect all of the time and therefore it's a terrible strategy. It's a losing strategy even for really good traders. So that's not how experts trade. They do the opposite. They're selling. Whenever they look at a chart and see that it's very difficult for bulls to make money, the experts are only looking to sell. Let's say you're a bull and you bought for any reason. Let's say you bought at this low. You're planning on getting out maybe after two or three consecutive bear bars, especially a new low with a big bear bar and then a follow through bar. Well, one thing you could do is you could say, okay, if I get that bear breakout and follow through, I'm going to reverse to short. So I buy at this low, get filled over here. And at this point, I know that I'm wrong and I'm going to reverse to short and it'll fall at least the same distance. And I'll be able to get out and erase my loss. I'll make as much as what I lost. It sounds good in theory, and it usually theoretically is possible to do. What's the one flaw? Even experienced traders do not like to reverse. It's hard to quickly change your evaluation of the market. Emotions get in your way. You don't feel objective. And even experts rarely do it. I sometimes do it, but I do not like to do it. And I rarely do it. I'll go back to what I've said countless times when a channel is tight, only look to sell. Another reason for that is the buying strategies are losers and you're going to get out. Theoretically, you could reverse the short and make up for the loss, but you're not going to do it often enough. And the result is you'll end up losing money. We have a bear breakout and we have follow through. And now we're channeling down. This is a bear breakout on a higher time frame chart. The odds are high that we're going lower. So you're thinking about getting short. The first thing you always have to determine is where a reasonable stop is. You have several choices. So let's say the market is right here and you're thinking about getting short. You know it's a very tight bear channel. We're probably going lower and you're going to go short. Reasonable stops may be above the top of the current bear leg, may be above the top of the bear breakout, may be above the top of this bear trend. This is a major lower high. All are reasonable. If you sell here, you choose any of the reasonable stops. You know what your risk is per contract. And that determines how many contracts you can hold. You have to sell. You know it's going lower. You see the bulls are trapped. The bulls are not making money. You can argue that we keep getting bad follow through after every bear bar, which is true. Bear bar doji, bear bar bull bar, bear bar bull reversal bar. But the channel is very tight and therefore the odds are the market's going lower. So you have to sell. What's the easiest way to sell? Just sell at the market and put your stop where you know it has to go. Any one of these three stops is reasonable. If you choose a tighter stop, it's going to get hit more often, but the loss will be less than if you use a wider stop. But all three choices are reasonable. So choosing any is okay. After 10 trades, if you take the tight stop, you'll end up with about the same profit and loss. As a trader who used the wider stop. Again, a tight bear channel, they always look weak. They always look like they're about to reverse. But if it's a tight channel, very small pullbacks, pullbacks only brief, you have to get short. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. What's the difference between trading a tight bear channel and trading a breakout? Well, one difference is if it's a breakout, it's much easier to sell at any time, including at the low. If it's a channel, a lot of traders do not like to sell at the low and they prefer to sell pullbacks. So they might be selling above the high of the prior bar. When the market's doing this, you know it's a bear trend. It's a very tight channel. If you were to draw channel lines, you'd see that the channel is very tight. The lines would be very close together. So you know it's going lower. For you to conclude that it's going lower, you have to be at least 60% certain. It never feels like 60%, but you know it's going lower. That means you are 60%. As a trader, 60% probability is as good as it's going to get. And you have to trade. You have to get short. And again, you could sell for any reason. I talk about selling closes. When I say sell the close, what I mean is when the bar closes, you sell at the market and you get filled at the start of the next bar, or you sell a second or two before this bar closes at the market and you'll get filled right around the close of this bar. That's the easiest way to get short in a very strong bear trend. Every reversal is minor. That means every reversal will become either a bear flag and lead to lower prices or a trading range and lead to lower prices. And therefore, if you see a reversal, it's going to fail and you can sell a strong bull of close, betting that the reversal is minor and that it will fail. Again, if you cannot decide what to do, just sell at the market. Here, you can also sell on a stop below the low of a prior bar. We have a pullback, sell on a stop right below its low. It doesn't matter where you sold or for what reason you sold. You just look to the left for a major lower high or a significant top and you can use your stop there. If it's a strong bear trend, it's not going to go above this high or that high or that high. And therefore, any of them is reasonable. I'm going to talk about more ways to get short in the next video. I began by talking about scaling into longs in a bear channel. If the channel is tight, you should not be buying for any reason. Theoretically, it's often possible to make money scaling into longs in a bear trend, but it's a terrible idea and experts do not do that. They do the opposite. They'll sell and maybe scale into shorts. Whenever I look at a chart and I'm thinking about placing a trade, I always look to the left. Have the bulls been making money pretty easily? And if it's very difficult for the bulls to make money, that makes me very confident that I have to sell and only sell. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading tight bear channels. Thank you. This is the third of five videos on trading. I'm multinational as well. I'll belta you.