 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video is about rounded tops and bottoms. You usually do not hear traders talking about rounded tops and bottoms, and that's because they are almost always something else, and traders prefer to use the other terms. Most reversal patterns involve trading ranges, and a rounded top or a rounded bottom is a trading range. The name is not important. Here we have a bull trend and the market entered a trading range. 50% chance you'll get trend resumption up. 50% chance you'll get trend reversal down. Some traders will call this a rounded top. In the old days, traders would call it distribution. I rarely use the term rounded top. Instead, I would look at this as a bull trend, a bear break below the channel, and an attempt at a lower high major trend reversal. Or, I could call it a triangle. Three pushes up. One, two, three, with reversals down. So it's a triangle. Lower high major trend reversal. Whenever you have a bull trend and then a trading range, the trading range almost always has some type of major trend reversal. Here we have a lower high major trend reversal. We have a reversal down, reversal down, reversal down. That's three reversals down. The pattern is sideways. I would call it a triangle. The lines are convergent, so I definitely would call it a triangle. But again, it doesn't matter. What matters is we have a bull trend and then a pullback. The bullback grew to 20 or more bars. The probability that the market will resume up is the same as the probability that it will reverse down. And there are different patterns within trading ranges. You can call this a head and shoulders bear flag. Left shoulder, head. Right shoulder, a triangle. A double bottom bull flag. It doesn't matter what you call it. All that matters is that you have to understand the market is doing this because the bulls and bears are balanced. And one side will win and the other side will lose. 50-50 chance. Here we've got a trend reversal. Traders will look back and say, oh, look, that was a rounded top. It doesn't matter if it's a little bit rounded. To me, it's a trading range after a bull trend. It doesn't matter what I call it. It just matters that there are ways to trade it. Sell the lower high major trend reversal. Sell a head and shoulders top bear flag. We have a bear breakout. A pullback to a small double top. Sell here. Or wait to sell closes. I talk more about trend resumption and trend reversal and patterns within trading ranges in the video on trading ranges. Is this a rounded bottom? We have a strong sell off and we have a pullback. A bear flag. Chances are the market's going to continue down. But the pullback keeps growing. 5 bars. 10 bars. At some point, it's no longer a pullback and a bear trend. It's a bull trend. It's a very tight bull channel. This is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Big down, big up, big confusion. Probably sideways, but it could be a reversal. This is a type of rounded bottom. You have a strong bear trend and then you have a lot of trading range types of bars. Yet, instead of going sideways, it's tilted up. To me, this is a type of rounded bottom. Again, I don't use that term. I would call this an endless pullback. We have a bear trend, a pullback to a bear flag. Yet, more and more bars get added to it. And at some point, you have to stop calling it a pullback in a bear trend and you have to call it a small pullback bull trend. Here, we clearly broke up. We have a breakout here. We have a breakout here. A breakout here. None of them is all that big. And now we're starting to get 3, 4 bull bars. Doji bar. 5, 6 bull bars. At this point, traders conclude that the market is now in a bull trend. It was obviously in a bull trend since the low, but this is where there's consensus. This is where the bears are giving up. It's a bull breakout above a bear flag. This is a bear flag. We have a small breakout. This is a wedge bear flag. 1, 2, 3 pushes up. And we have a bull breakout above that. And then a bigger wedge bear flag. 1, 2, 3. We have a bull breakout above that. Whenever you have a bear flag like this and the channel is very tight like this, it's a low probability sell with a stop. 2, 3, 4 bull. In general, if you're looking to sell, it's better to wait until there's a strong bear breakout and then sell lower. This is dangerous for the bears. It's a very tight bull channel and therefore it's probably a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. At some point, you have to decide the market's probably always in long. I would begin to suspect it with this bar and then with these bars. And then once we start to get here, I would start to think that the odds are we're going higher rather than lower. Four consecutive bull bars, the bears gave up. And at this point, there's consensus that this is no longer a bear flag in this bear trend. It's now a bull trend. Even though we did not get above the top of the sell climax, this is a consensus. This is the bears giving up and the bulls getting confident. If you want, you can call it a rounded bottom. A lot of times, this is what rounded bottoms look like. Again, it's basically a bear trend and then confusion, a trading range here and in this pullback. And then you get a reversal up. Had this broke to the downside, you would not call it a rounded bottom. You would have called it a bear flag. Another endless pullback. Very strong bull breakout. And then a pullback. So now a channel. And then we're starting to pull back. It's still a pullback, a bull flag. More likely we're going higher. But at some point after 10 or 20 bars, I start to call it an endless pullback. And once you have an endless pullback, then the probability of trend resumption up falls to about 50%. The probability of a bear breakout and a reversal down is then 50%. You can call this a rounded top if you want. To me, it's an endless pullback. And clearly at this point where you have a consecutive pair of bars, big bear bars closing on their lows, probably a measuring gap. A trading range breakout, at least a measured move down. This is where everyone agreed that it's no longer a pullback and a bull trend. It's now a bear trend. Consecutive bear bars, big bear bars closing on their lows. Endless pullback and a tight channel. This is a parabolic wedge top. Three or four pushes up. One, pull back two, pull back three or four. And when you get a parabolic wedge top and you start to pull back five or six bars, probably the market's going to pull back ten or more bars and decide between trend resumption up or trend reversal down. This is common after a parabolic wedge top. One, two, three or three. Where you start to get five or ten bars in a tight bear channel. That's telling you that at this point I would say this is a parabolic wedge top. 50-50 chance we're going to get a reversal down. The bull's trying to resume up. They tried to reverse this bear breakout. But look at the follow through. No follow through. Breakout mode here. You can call it a triangle. We went up. We went up. We went up. Three pushes up. A horizontal pattern. Breakout mode. And this is the important point. Consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows. This is where the market became clearly always in short. Bear breakout below what the bulls hoped was a bull flag. The bulls gave up. And now it's a bear trend. It's no longer a pullback in a bull trend. Chances are after a break-up that looks like this we're going to get a measured move down. This probably will have at least a small second leg down. One pullback, two. Probably will lead to a measured move down based upon the height of this bull flag. And we got more than that. Pullback, this bull bar. We have a gap. The midpoint of the gap is this line. And that's the measured move down. Typically, I first look at the measured move from the top of the bull trend to the breakout point. This low or that low. Sometimes, if it falls below that, I then look at a midpoint of the gap. This attempt to reverse up. And these lows. And we fell to that price level. And you can see there's some buying. It's also buying around the bottom of the channel. Spike pullback channel. It's usually buying here. However, it did not last. The bear's got a low two bear flag. And we went down for another leg. If you want, you can call this a rounded top. It doesn't matter. In this particular case, I would call it a parabolic wedge top in an endless pullback. And then if you want a small double top, bear flag or a triangle. At this point, the probability went up significantly that we were in a bear trend. At this point, on this close, 60% chance we're going to have a swing down. Pull trend, bear breakout. A small double top, lower high. So double top, lower high, major trend reversal. Rounded top and then a pullback. If you want, you can call it an inverted cup and handle pattern. So cup and then a handle. To me, it's a lower high, major trend reversal. Big cup and then a pullback to a small handle. Bull trend, rounded top. Again, I view this as a bull trend and a trading range and therefore breakout mode. It's initially a pullback, a pullback, a bull flag. But once it starts to grow to 20 or more bars, the probability of trend resumption up falls to about the same as for trend reversal down. It's a rounded top. But instead of the market reversing, we got a bull breakout. Pullback that grows 20 or more bars. I stop calling it a pullback because the pullback implies the market will probably resume up. Once the pullback grows to 20 or more bars, it's an endless pullback. I call it a trading range. Once I call it a trading range, I am saying that the probability of a bull breakout is about the same as the probability of a bear breakout. The bears, if they did short, hoping for a rounded top or an endless pullback and a reversal down, they'll buy back their shorts. We have three consecutive bull bars and we're breaking above that high. This is the start of trend resumption up. And the bulls will buy as well, either on a stop above that high or we have a pullback. They'll buy on a stop above the high of this pullback bar and they'll get filled right here. This big bull bar tells you that lots of traders bought. Bears bought to cover shorts and bulls bought as well, expecting at least a small second leg up. Again, you can call this a rounded bottom. You can call it a bull breakout and a small higher low. Major trend reversal. A head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. You can call this entire bear channel a pullback from this bull reversal. Even though the sell off, the pullback, fell below the bottom of this bull reversal. In my mind, this is still simply a pullback from this bull reversal. Sometimes the pullback falls below the bottom of the bull trend. And it's still basically simply a bull flag, even though it fell below the bottom of the bull trend. Technically, I would call this a bear trend, a bull breakout and a higher low major trend reversal. Maybe a wedge higher low. Three pushes down. One, two, three. Even though it's not a very good wedge shape. Traders would either buy above the high of this bar or they'd wait for a pair of strong bull bars and then buy here. And now we have an even bigger higher low major trend reversal. Bear trend, very strong bull breakout. And then several attempts at a higher low and then a second leg up. Leg one, pullback leg two. A large head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. A rounded bottom. Again, I just don't use that term. I use other terms like higher low, major trend reversal. Not a strong buy signal bar. And not a strong break above the bear trend line. However, here we have a pair of very big bull bars closing on their highs. Probably at this point the market's always in long and we're going at least a little bit higher. Probably at least for a measured move up. Maybe based upon the height of the trading range. Maybe based upon the height of these two bars. The open of this bar to the close of that bar. Very strong breakout. At this point we're either in a bull trend and we'll have a second leg up. Or we're in a trading range and have a deep pullback. In either case, bulls are going to look to buy a sell off. Expecting either a trading range that will test back to the top of the range. Or a second leg up and a bull trend. You get a pullback. Here, more than 50%. It's also testing the top of this tight trading range. And we're trying to reverse up above a bull bar. Small double bottom. Maybe a wedge. One, two, three. Does not matter. That two does not fall below three. Doesn't matter. We're above the bottom of the bull trend. The sell off has bad follow through after bear bars. It's probably a bear leg in a trading range or in a bull flag. Traders will look to buy a reversal up. If you want, you can call this a rounded bottom. We have a bear trend and a rounded bottom. I think it's a big, higher, low, major trend reversal. Bear trend. A sloppy, low, low, low, low, low, low, low. If you want, you can call this a rounded bottom. We have a bear trend and a rounded bottom. I think it's a big, higher, low, major trend reversal. Bear trend. A sloppy, weak bear trend, but bear trend. Extremely strong bull breakout. And then a pullback to a higher low. Very deep pullback, but still a pullback that held above the bottom of the bull breakout. This is an exceptionally strong bull breakout. The odds are high that we're going to get a second leg up, even with a deep pullback like this. The bulls see this as a weak reversal attempt on the part of the bears. They know the odds are it's not going to be a bear trend, that we're not going to break below this low. And therefore, they start buying below bars. They'll buy below this bar. They'll buy below this bar. They'll buy below this bar. They'll buy below this bar. They're starting to accumulate a position. When the market has a rounded bottom in the old days, you know, 50 years ago, 100 years ago, traders would call this an accumulation area. And the same with this. Traders buying below bars, starting to build a position. Buying below this bar, betting the breakout will fail. Buying below these lows, betting that the bear breakout attempts will fail. The bulls look at all of these attempts by the bears to resume the bear trend as a great chance to buy at a great price. Bear breakout below this low. Yet, instead of continuing down, the market reversed up. The bears were not selling aggressively at that low. What took place here in part was bears who sold here used the breakout to a new low to buy back their shorts. Bear scalpers were buying back shorts. So the bears are scalping. They are not confident that the market's going lower. And the bulls bought the breakout as well. The bears know this is the dominant feature of the chart. And the odds are the market's going higher. They'll sell as long as they can make money. But they know the price is too low. Eventually, they're selling the market. Eventually, they're selling, they're selling, making money. They're selling, and then they give up. Once they see a pair of big bull bars like this, the odds are we've begun a swing up. A rounded top here. A head and shoulder stop. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. It grew into a bigger rounded top. A failed breakout above a head and shoulder stop. And now we have a nested head and shoulder stop. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. And it became a bigger head and shoulder stop. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Again, I don't refer to this as a rounded top. I don't use that term. There's no clear signal anywhere in here. Maybe sell below here. Maybe sell below here. You sell below a bull bar. Not all that high probability. Despite three pushes up. One, two, three. Higher probability. You wait for a pair of big bear bars and a breakout. And then start selling closes. Very tight bull channel. Probably the first reversal down is minor. And the market will go sideways. And then possibly form a lower high major trend reversal. You can call it a double top lower high major trend reversal. Decent sell signal bar. A lot of the bears will hold short, stop above this high. And they will not exit on this reversal up. Some bears will exit after two legs down. One pull back two. Bottom of a training range. And then they'll look to sell again. Either here or below this micro double top. Double top, lower high, major trend reversal. We have a bull breakout and it failed. If you want, you can call it a wedge lower high. We're getting a high, lower high, lower high. We have a low, lower low, lower low. An early bear trend. So some traders will look to sell low, a wedge lower high. Higher probability. Start to sell closes. After, for example, the second close. Two big bear trend bars closing below the low of the past 50 bars or so. The odds are we're going lower. Traders start to sell closes here, here, here. It doesn't matter where you sell any of these closes. The stop is here. The stop is far away. The risk is great. However, you're getting high probability. And a lot of traders don't mind paying for high probability with greater risk. You'll sometimes read older books that refer to around the top as the distribution pattern. Strong bulls are selling out of their positions above bars, distributing their position to weak bulls and to bears. This is a distribution pattern. To me, it's a bull trend, a trading range. The market's in breakout mode. 50% chance you'll get trend resumption up. 50% chance you'll get trend reversal down. Once you have a pair of big bear bars like that, 60% chance you're in a swing down. The strong bears look for these bull breakouts. They think the market is topping out. And every time they see a strong bull bar closing on its high, they sell. They sell. You can see what the follow through is. A bull bar, the bears sell. So the strong bears are betting that all of these reversal attempts will fail. The strong bulls also suspect that the price is too high. And they want to buy lower. Eventually, all you're left with is weak bulls and they give up. The strong bulls want to buy lower, so they're not buying. They want to buy down here. The weak bulls are buying and here they give up. Rounded tops and bottoms. I don't use those terms because the patterns are always something else. Like a head and shoulders pattern. A major trend reversal. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the end of the video on rounded tops and bottoms. Rounded tops and bottoms. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the end of the video on rounded tops and bottoms. Rounded tops. like a head and shoulders pattern, a major trend reversal. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the end of the video on rounded tops and bottoms.