 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of seven videos on protective stops. Most traders begin using price action stops, stops based upon the bars on the chart and the patterns on the chart. I want to talk a little bit about how a bull trend needs higher lows. They're more important than higher highs, because bulls put their stops below the most recent major higher low. If the market falls below that major higher low, traders assume the bull trend has ended and the market has entered either a trading range or a bear trend. When you're in a trade and you have a stop and the market goes your way and it makes a strong breakout, traders will often raise their stop to below the most recent higher low. That is called trailing your stop. And the same is true in a bear trend as well. And I'm going to talk a little bit about stops in a bear trend. We have a bear trend, a rally. I don't have the trend line drawn, but it's a rally that broke above the bear trend line. And then we have a pullback to a higher low. And now we have a strong breakout, five consecutive bull bars, two with good sized bodies closing on their highs. This is a higher low major trend reversal. Since there is a left shoulder over here, it's also a head and shoulders bottom. The market is always in long and probably will go higher. Whenever you look at a signal bar that is possibly the start of a strong leg up, traders will put the stop right below the signal bar low. For example, if they buy above this bar, they'll put the stop below its low, especially once we get a strong bull breakout. On the other hand, sometimes you'll buy above a signal bar and you're not sure that it's the end of the pullback and the pullback may continue to grow. In that case, you put your stop below the most recent major higher low. For example, we have a buy signal bar here for a high two bull flag, two legs down, one pullback two, but the body is small compared to these two big bear bars. These two big bear bars are strong enough so that the market might have a second leg down, one pullback two. If you buy above the high of the bar, you get long here. In general, you should not put your stop here. There's too much risk that the market is going to go below that low as it did here, yet still remain always in long. It'll still fail to get below the bottom of the most recent major higher low. This is a major higher low because it's a strong rally and it went to a new high. If the market falls below this low, traders will question the premise that the market is now in a bull trend. They'll assume that it is either in a trading range or possibly even a bear trend. High two bull flag. Here's the buy signal bar. It's okay to buy above its high. Get long here. Higher probability to buy above this bar. If you take this buy above this buy signal bar, I would put the stop here. You could put your stop here and then buy again on the reversal up from here. However, you end up losing your entry price to your stop price. It's better to simply rely on the wider stop and trust that you're correct, that this is a bull trend and this is a bull flag, but it might pull back a little bit more. Traders can buy for any reason. We're always in long. They could buy on a stop just above this high and get filled right here. We have a breakout bar here. Big tail. Okay to buy the bull close of this bar. A bull close is good follow through. You could also buy above the high of this bar. You could buy a high two buy. High one, high two, and now we have a second entry buy for that high two bull flag here. We have another breakout and follow through bar and a pullback. Another bull flag. You can buy above the high of this bull bar. It doesn't matter where you bought. All of these trades have the same stop. Below the most recent major high or low. A strong breakout to a new high. This is a major high or low. If the market falls below it, the premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. Therefore, this is a reasonable place to place your stop if you're betting that the market's going to go higher. Whenever you're buying later in a bull trend after a strong breakout, the stop is further away compared to buying here or here. But the probability of higher prices is higher as well once you've had a strong breakout like this with good follow through. A bull trend needs higher lows and higher highs. It especially needs major higher lows. If the market's no longer making higher lows, then the premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. It's probably either a trading range or possibly even a bear trend. Bulls like to put their stops below the bottom of the most recent strong bull leg. This is a major higher low. We've had eight bars up without a bare body. This is an important higher low. It's a buy the close bull trend. You could buy closes here, any of these closes. Let's say you bought here. You could buy for any reason. You could buy at the market. You could buy a close. You could buy above this bar. You can buy at the low of this bar betting the reversal down will fail. It doesn't matter. Anyone buying for any reason through here has the same stop below the bottom of the major higher low. It doesn't matter where you bought anywhere after this close all through here. Traders use the same stop below the bottom of the most recent major higher low. I mentioned a couple times here that bulls need major higher lows. If you buy here, your stop is here. If the market falls below this major higher low, it's probably no longer in a bull trend. You could get out below this bear bar and then look to buy again above a bull bar. It did not get above this bull bar, but it did get above this bull bar. So you could buy again right there. And once there's a strong rally, especially one that goes to a new high, but not always. Sometimes the strong rally does not quite reach the major high. Traders will raise their stop from here to below this low, because they'll consider this a major higher low. If the bull trend is still intact, it should not fall below the low of this strong bull breakout. That's trailing the stop from the original location to a new location. This might be a higher low major trend reversal. We don't see the bars to the left, but let's assume that it was a bear trend. This is a rally and this is a higher low major trend reversal. It doesn't matter. It's still a bull trend whether or not there was a bear trend before it. It could have simply been a breakout of a trading range. We have three pushes up. One pullback, two pullback, three pullback, a new high. This is slightly above that. And we have a bear reversal bar, a bear inside bar. This is possibly a failed breakout. Strong enough breakout, traders will buy the close. They'll buy for any reason. They'll buy at the market. They'll buy on a stop above the top of this leg up. And then they'll buy the close. And they'll buy the close. Because it's a third push up and a possible failed breakout and a strong bear bar closing on its low, this is the possible wedge top. And it could be the end of the rally. You have several choices here. You can exit below the low of this bear bar and then look to buy again if there's a bull bar and a reversal back up. Other bulls will rely on their stop below the bottom of the most recent high or low, betting that any pullback, even if it's deep, will convert the bull trend into a trading range instead of a bear trend. In other words, the market will stay above this low and test back up to this high. And the final choice is you could simply rely on your earlier stop. This is an especially strong rally and the start of a bull trend. And sometimes the market may have an ABC pullback. A, B, C, where C falls slightly below this low, but not below the bottom of the bull trend. And look at what happened here. Let's say you did exit below the low of this bear bar. You're looking to buy again above a bull bar on a reversal up. But this low is slightly below that low. For the bulls who tighten their stop from here to below the low of this bull leg, they get stopped out here. And that's okay. They can buy again on the reversal up. Some bears would take that short. It's a wedge top and a strong bear bar closing on its low. I think it's a good location to exit the longs. Typically in a situation like this, a wedge top with a good sell signal bar, I would exit below that bear bar, exit my longs. Some bears would short. With three bull bars closing on their highs, I typically would not take that short. I think a minor reversal and a trading range is more likely than a bear trend. Some bears do take that short and it is a reasonable short. We have a strong bear reversal. Two big bear bars reversing these three bull bars. Big up, big down, big confusion. Usually a trading range is likely. But a wedge one, two, three, typically has two legs sideways to down. One, pullback two. It's still above the bottom of the bull trend. Even though it fell below this low, it could simply be a two-legged pullback. One, pullback two, where the pullback went above the top of the bull trend. It could be a double bottom bull flag, which is a large high two. Leg one, high one, and then pullback, and then possibly leg two. Still above the bottom of the bull trend. Still a possible higher low compared to this. It's obviously below this. It's still a possible broad bull channel. Where you have a rally and a deep, complex pullback. Sometimes even going always in short, but then a new high, and then another higher low, and a new high. For the bears, they see a wedge. One, two, three pushes up, and a reversal. They're expecting at least a second leg sideways to down after a reversal this strong. Whenever I see big up, big down, and a buy signal bar like this, I often do not take that buy. Because big up, big down creates big confusion in a trading range, I usually wait for a second entry buy. You can see the market went above the high of this bar, and then immediately went below it again. This is a second entry buy. It's still above the bottom of the strong gold trend. Buying above this bar is a higher probability buy than buying above this bar. I would use the same stop for both. Had I bought above here and got filled here, or bought above here and got filled here, my stop is still here. We had a reasonable buy here. Pretty strong rally. I think it's reasonable to be long here. The market never gave the bulls a chance to get out. Immediately there was a disappointment bar, and we did not get any bounce up to this close. A trader buying this close and managing his trade properly using a correct wide stop and buying again above a bull bar, either above this bar, or above this bar, or maybe above this bar, usually is able to avoid a loss. This reversal down is still above the bottom of the bull leg. I think a trading range is more likely than a bear trend. And if it's a trading range, it goes down, but it also goes back up. If you take a reasonable buy, buying a strong bull close and a bull trend, usually the market will let you out without a loss if you manage your trade appropriately. Some bulls will rely on the wide stop, the bottom of the initial very strong rally, and they'll look to add on above a bull bar, either here or above this doji or above this bull bar. The bulls who exit below this bear bar, expecting a trading range instead of a bear trend. The bulls who did exit below this bear bar know that it was reasonable to buy here, and therefore it's reasonable to buy more either here or here. The bulls who exited below this bear bar will buy here or above here, expecting the market to get back up here. And therefore it's reasonable to buy above a bull bar here or here. And you can see that if a bull bought here and used this stop, he would have made money. If a bull exited below this bar and bought more either here or here and used this stop, he would make money. If a bull exited here and he bought here for a test of this close, he would make money. He could also hold for a swing up. We have a double bottom. This is slightly below that. If you want, you can call it a lower low major trend reversal. Bear trend, a lot of good bull bars, good buying pressure. An attempt to resume the bear trend, but immediately reversing up with a pretty decent bull bar. Good sized body closing above its midpoint. It's reasonable to buy on a stop above the high of this bull bar and you get filled right here. It's a strong buy signal bar on the reversal up. It's appropriate and reasonable to put your protective stop just below the low of this bull bar. That is a price action stop. You're putting a stop based upon the price action right below the bottom of a buy signal bar, where the context is good for a possible swing up. Strong breakout and a follow through bar and another follow through bar. Chances are there'll be at least a small second leg up. It might be this, it might be this. It could be many legs up and we could go for a swing. We're rallying, we're pulling back, and then we have a bull bar here. Some bulls would buy above the high of this bar. A failed low two, low one, low two. Other bulls prefer to buy above bull bars and they'll buy above this bull bar and get filled here. It doesn't matter if you bought here or here. Look to the left. Where is the most recent major high or low? Is this a major high or low? No, it's minor. We could easily continue down more. Is this a major high or low? No, it did not have a strong breakout to a new high. This is the most recent high or low. It doesn't matter whether you bought here or here. The stop for both entries is still here below the bottom of the most recent bull leg. Once you've had the breakout, four consecutive bull bars to a new significant high above the top of the most recent major lower high in this case, traders will raise their stop. They'll trail their stop from here to here. So once the market is up here, it does not matter whether you bought here or here or for any reason. Once the market is here, traders have a protective stop here. This is now the most recent major lower high. You could argue that it's still fairly minor and that you could rely on a stop down here. But most of the time, when you have a strong breakout to a new high with follow through, the market will not come down to this low. So it's reasonable to put your stop just below that low. Another high two bull flag, two legs down, one pullback two. Good looking buy signal bar. It's appropriate to buy on a stop above this high. And it's a good enough buy signal bar with bull bar here, bull bar here. It's a breakout test of the breakout point here, a test of this gap. A gap between this low and that high, this low and that high, this low and that high. Once you get filled on a long above here, it's reasonable to use a price action stop, a stop right below the bottom of this strong bull reversal bar. If the bull trend is valid and if the market is going higher, once you go above this bull bar, it typically would not go below its low. And therefore it's reasonable to put your stop here. And again, it doesn't matter if you bought here or here or anywhere down here. Once it goes above this bull bar, most traders would tighten their stop to just below the bottom of that bull bar. That is a price action stop. A small double bottom, a high two bull flag, a fairly tight trading range. If you take this buy above this bar, I think your stop is still here. But once this bar closes, you have a new breakout to a new high. It looks like we might be entering a trading range. I think once this bar closes, you do not want the market to come back below the low of this bar. Otherwise, the market might be in a trading range instead of a bull trend. It's reasonable to use a tighter stop. But getting trading range price action here, the market might be evolving from a bull trend into a trading range. And ultimately it did. It just had further to go before the reversal down. If you buy above this bar, your stop is here. By the time the bar closes, I would trail the stop here. If the market is going to evolve into a trading range, you don't want to be using too wide of a stop. You want to begin to trade it like a trading range. Buy low, sell high, and scalp. Two legs down, a bear bar, bull bar. So first leg down. And then two bear bars, second leg down, reversal up. Good looking bull bar. You can buy above its high. I would put the stop here just in case we get a wedge three legs down. One, pull back. Two, pull back. Three. But once you break to a new high, traders will raise their stop maybe to here. Another high two bull flag. High one, pull back. High two. Stop either here or here. I would put the stop here. We're getting a lot of small bars, prominent tails. Chances are the bull trend will end soon and evolve either into a trading range or a bear trend. Weak breakout. We have a bull bar and a follow through bar, but a tail and the bar is not big. We have a doji bar here. We have a bull bar here, a breakout and follow through. The breakout bar is not big. We have a pair of dojis. It looks like from here on, we're starting to get a lot of trading range price action. Traders will, instead of waiting for stops to be hit, assume that the market is in a trading range. Trading range, buy low, sell high. And sell high also means sell out of longs high on a reversal down. Traders will switch from using price action stops at the bottom of the most recent bear leg to selling a reversal down from a new high. The new high traders will exit just in case it becomes a trading range. They buy here. We have a new high above here and we're reversing down. The bulls will sell just in case it's the start of a trading range or even a bear trend. You can call it a wedge. Three pushes up here, here and here. It's actually four or five pushes up. One, two, three, four, five. You can even count this as a push up as well. In any case, we're getting a lot of pushes up. And here we have a gap that stayed open, this low and that high. And then here we have a gap that either stayed open or maybe there's a little bit of an overlap. So bears selling above this high did not make money. Bears selling at this high made money. Bears selling at this high might have made money. If they sell this high, sell a little bit more higher, they might have scalped. We're getting overlap, stairs, pullbacks are falling below breakout points. Breakout, a pullback below the breakout point. The market's starting to transition into a trading range. And therefore, instead of exiting on stops below the bottom of the most recent bull breakout, it's better to exit on a reversal down from a new high. The price action stop here is below this bar, not all the way down here. Bulls will exit. Aggressive bears might start selling using a very wide stop. I think it's still a fairly tight bull channel. And any reversal is probably going to be minor, followed by a trading range or resumption of the bull trend. However, once you get three or four bear bars, especially a pair of big bear bars closing on the lows, the market has probably converted either into a trading range or a bear trend. And after three or four bear bars, two of them closing on their lows like this, traders will start selling this close and putting a stop up here, bidding on at least two legs down. I mentioned trailing stops. I'm going to talk a little bit more about it now. I'm going to talk a little bit more about it now. We have a double bottom, slightly lower low, and we have a breakout and a follow through. Traders will start buying closes here or here. After each breakout to a new high, if the breakout is strong, traders begin to raise stop, to trail their stops, to protect their profits, reduce their risk. Traders usually like to raise their stops to below the most recent major higher low. If the breakout is strong, the prior higher low can be major. Traders will start buying here. For example, if you're buying here, your initial stop is down here. Maybe you'll put your stop here because we have a pair of breakout bars. In general, you're looking for a reasonable stop. Some traders will put a tight stop here. Other traders will use a wide stop there. Both are reasonable. If you use a tighter stop, you're going to lose more often, but you'll lose less per loss. If you use a wider stop, you're going to lose less often and you'll lose more every time you lose. But after 100 trades, it doesn't matter if you use tighter stops or wider stops. Your net profit and your total losses will be about the same. The key is doing something that is reasonable. If you use a stop that is far too tight, you're going to lose money. It's a losing strategy. If you use a stop that is far too wide, you're going to lose money. If you use a stop that is far too high, you'll lose more than you lose more than you lose. Can you put a stop below the low of this breakout bar, arguing that if it falls below this low, the breakout will have failed? If that's a fairly tight stop, probably better to put a stop below here, the bottom of the bull leg, or even down here. Both are reasonable. Some traders will buy here and say, well, it shouldn't fall much below a 50% pullback. I'll put my stop right below the midpoint of the rally, the bottom of the rally, the top of the rally, or the entry price. And this is just below the midpoint. Other traders will put a stop here, below the bottom of the bull trend. This is really a major higher low. This is minor. We could pull back more and still be in a bull trend. This is minor as well. We have a reasonably good breakout to a new high. Is this major? Typically, if the breakout is good and the trend will continue, it should not fall below here. So it's reasonable to put a stop here as well. But sometimes when you have a bull trend, you get a very deep pullback. Therefore, it's better to use a wider stop. You lose more when you're wrong, but you have a higher probability of making money. All of these stops are reasonable choices. And if you take 100 trades and use any of these four types of stops, the total profit after 100 trades will be about the same. I want to talk a little bit about stops and a bear trend. I was using a bull trend to illustrate examples of how to use stops. Let's say there was a bull trend here and we don't see it. And then we got a small, higher low, major trend reversal here. And you sell below that bear bar and you get filled. This might be a little bit below that bar. So you either get filled here or here. You could put your stop right above that high. In general, I would use a wider stop. And it's reasonable to put your stop above the top of that bear reversal bar. That's a price action stop. In general, if you have a small signal bar and you put a stop above its high, it's a low probability bet. Whenever you are risking very little, the probability of success is much less. Chances are, if it goes above this bear bar, it's probably not going to go much further. Some traders would prefer to use a wider stop, maybe up here, maybe a measured move up based upon the height of these bull bars. But let's say, for example, you put your stop above the top of this sell signal bar and you sold below its low and you got filled here. Other traders will wait for a bear breakout and then a pullback and sell below its low. Here we have a double top. We're up and down, up, maybe down. Traders will sell below here. It's a low two bear flag after a bear breakout, a reasonable swing trade. You can sell here or you can sell here. If you do, your stop is still up here at the top of the bear trend or possibly above the top of the strong bear breakout. After every strong breakout like this, especially one tuning in the low, a lot of traders will put their stop right above the top of that big bear bar. If it's very close to the top of the bear trend, I typically keep my stop at the top of the bear trend because sometimes it'll go above the top of the bear bar, but not above the top of the bear trend. Strong breakout to a new low. If this is a bear trend and not simply a trading range, the market should not get above the top of this bear swing. This is now a major lower high and most bears would put their stops above the high of this bar right here. Every strong breakout to a new low means the top of the bear leg is a major lower high. As long as the market is making major lower highs, it's still in a bear trend. If it goes above the top of one of those major lower highs, your premise of a bear trend is no longer valid. The market is no longer in a bear trend. It's either in a trading range or in a bull trend. And therefore, if you took a trade based upon the idea that the market was in a bear trend and the market is showing you it's not in a bear trend, you get out. You get out when your stop is hit. Three big bear bars, six or seven bars down, a breakout to a new low. If this is a tight channel, bear trend, the market should not get back above this high. It's reasonable to put your stop above this high after you've seen this breakout and this follow through. Three new bear bars. Once the market is down here, traders will put their stop above the top of this bear leg. This is a major lower high. It doesn't matter if you sold up here or here or for any reason, if you sold this close, the stop now is above the top of this strong bear breakout. Another strong breakout to a new low. Once the market is here or here, no matter where you sold, your stop is now here above the top of that bear leg. The market is in a very tight bear channel and we have a bear breakout here, another one here, another breakout here, another breakout here. What do you notice about this bear breakout? It's the biggest bear breakout, occurring 20 or more bars in a bear trend, and it's breaking below the bottom of a bear channel. 75% chance if you break below the bottom of the bear channel, you're going to reverse up. Whenever you see the strongest bear breakout, 20 or more bars late in a bear trend, that breakout is going to be an exhaustion gap. Right now, the gap is between this high and this low or that low. 75% chance we're going to get back above this low. This is probably an exhaustive end of the move, not an acceleration of the move into a stronger bear trend. So, because once you see this exceptional bear breakout late in a bear trend below the bottom of the bear channel, and you know the odds are the market's going to get above the top of the bear breakout, you don't put your stop here anymore. You exit on a reversal up, especially above a bull bar. We have a bull bar here. It's okay to exit your short above the high of that bull bar. Other traders will wait to see if we get three consecutive bull bars, especially one or two having strong bull closes, and then they'll exit on that bar. And the bulls know the situation as well, and they'll buy. They'll buy above this bull bar or above this bull bar, or on the close of the third bull bar, betting that the market is going to get to the top of the sell climax before it gets to a new low. So, let's say you sold the worst close right here in this breakout. That's okay. It's okay as long as you use the appropriate stop. After every new low, traders look to trail their stop, tighten their stop to reduce their risk. You could still use a stop way up here, but if the trend is truly going to continue, it should not get above the top of the most recent strong bear breakout. It makes more sense to tighten your stop to above this lower high. If the stop is too far, it's not too far here, but if it is too far, a lot of traders will find other reasons to exit before the market hits that distant stop. For example, they might put a stop just above a 50% pullback. You often hear traders talk about using a break-even stop. There's no mathematical basis for a break-even stop. In general, it's not a good stop. Sometimes it makes sense to use because you don't know what to do and the market's moving fast and you don't want to risk giving back any profit. So, emotionally, it's often a good decision and therefore, sometimes it is a good decision, but there's no mathematical basis to a break-even stop. If you're being totally objective, you're never going to use a break-even stop. Again, it doesn't matter what stop you use as long as it's reasonable. Tighter stops lose less every time you lose, but you're going to lose more often. Wider stops have a smaller probability of being hit. You have a higher probability of making money if you use a wide stop. When the stop does get hit, your losses will be bigger. After 100 trades, if you like tight stops, you'll lose about the same and win about the same as a trader who likes wide stops. As long as both choices are reasonable, it does not matter which you take. For example, it's reasonable to put a stop above the top of this bear breakout. It's also reasonable to put the stop above the top of the entire bear leg, above this lower high. Some traders will look at the entire bear trend and say, I don't know, it could easily get above this bar, form a higher high double top and resume down. Maybe I want to put my stop above the top of the entire bear trend. If that's too far, maybe instead I'll simply put my stop above a 50% pullback, which is here. Top of the bear trend, bottom of the bear trend, 50% pullback here. Maybe I'll put my stop a little bit above the midpoint. And then some traders will keep their stop above the top of the entire bear trend. A tight channel like this is going to be a breakout on a higher time frame and keeping the stop here is simply putting your stop above the top of the bear breakout. Again, these are all reasonable stops and therefore any of them is good. If you sell this close and you put a stop above this bull bar, that's probably not reasonable. Chances are you're going to get a pullback, but the bear trend will continue down. You do not want to use a stop that's too tight. You don't want to use a stop that's too wide. Both of them result in losing strategies. I began by talking about a price action stop, a stop based upon the patterns that you see on the chart. I made the point that bull trends need higher lows, major higher lows. If the market falls below a major higher low, it's no longer a bull trend. It's either a trading range or a bear trend. If you are in a trade and the market moves in your direction, and you have a new major higher low, you can raise your stop to below that major higher low. Moving your stop is called trailing your stop. I then talked about stops in a bear trend. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This was the third of seven videos on protective stops. officers and warriors within your Welcome to last<|pl|>