 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on wedges. I'm going to begin by making the point that wedges are rarely perfect. I'll then move on to talk about how most channels are wedges, whether or not the channels are convergent. And finally, I'll discuss the many different types of wedges. Sometimes a wedge has a leg that's only a single bar. And sometimes it's simply a doji bar. This leg, two bars down. This leg, a couple bars down. Here, the third leg, maybe it's this bare bar. Maybe it's these two bare bars with that low. One bar down, one bar down, two small dojis down. Here we have four legs. One, two, three. Some computers will say this is one, two, three. These are small patterns and they're probably clearer on smaller timeframe charts. However, I would not go looking at the smaller timeframe charts. You can infer what's going on simply by what you see on this chart. Different computers use different bars to count the legs. Doesn't matter. Is this the first push up or is this the first push up? Doesn't matter. Both computers, no matter how you do the count, see the same thing. They see a bold channel, maybe convergent lines. They expect a bare break below the bold channel. Again, very tight channel. Does not look like a wedge here. However, you can infer that it's a wedge on a smaller timeframe chart. Three pushes down here. And it's not really convergent. However, three pushes down. Context is good for a wedge. We have a spike, pullback and then possibly a channel. Strong enough breakout here for at least one more leg down. So one, two, three. Traders will look for a reversal up. The closer something is to that ideal, the higher the probability that it will behave like the ideal. So the better looking a wedge, the more likely a lot of computers and traders will trade it like a wedge. And therefore, more likely you'll get the reversal. Wedge bull flags. We have a bull trend and wedge bull flag here, wedge bull flag here. And these bull flags, we have a couple of bear bars here. One bear bar here. A couple of bear bars here. Here, one bear bar. Another bear bar. And the bear bars are attempts to create a bear breakout. For the bulls, the bull bar that follows that bear bar is a pullback from that bear breakout. So we have a bear reversal or bear breakout and then a pullback. Another bear breakout and another pullback. Another bear breakout and another pullback. At some point, the bears decide that all of these strong bear breakouts are not working and they stop selling. And the market then ends up going the other way. All of these reversal attempts are minor and therefore part of a trading range or a bull flag. Wedge bear flag. The bull legs are sometimes small. One, two, three bull bars. And they're attempts to reverse the bear trend. Here, we tried to reverse up. Failed. Tried to reverse up. Failed. Tried to reverse up. Tried to reverse up. And failed. Traders see this as a bull breakout and then pullback from that bull breakout. Another bull breakout, pullback from that breakout. If the bull breakouts repeatedly fail, the bulls eventually give up and the market goes the other way. Reversals in trading ranges are common. And a lot of the patterns are wedges. We have a bull breakout here. We have a bull breakout here. And then we have a small bear trend that's not falling very far. But this bear trend, this bear channel, I would call it a wedge bull flag. And we got a bull breakout. The pullback ended or the pullback was a wedge bull flag. And that's true here as well. We're trying to trend down. We have a lower high. We have a lower low. It's a bear channel, but it has a wedge shape. And here it's only about a 50% pullback and a bull trend. The odds are this wedge bear channel is going to have a bull breakout. And therefore it's a pullback and a bull trend. Here we have a sell off and a pullback. And this pullback has a wedge shape. It's a small bull trend. We have higher highs and higher lows, but the odds are you're going to get the bear breakout. So you can call it a wedge bear flag. Here as well, even though it doesn't really have a wedge shape, if you want, you can call it a wedge bear flag. A bull trend, but a minor reversal. And a bigger bear trend, maybe about a 50% pullback. This is really not a good example of it. But the idea is that you have a bear trend, about a 50% pullback. And you can infer that it's a wedge on a smaller timeframe chart. So it's a wedge bear flag. The same is true here. This has a little bit better wedge shape, but it's a wedge top. Wedge bottom. I like to connect the first point with the third point. That means the second push is often below the line. Here's the start of the wedge, possibly the end of the wedge. And I ignore that second point going below the line. And that's true of a lot of wedges. That if you connect the first and third points, the second point is often beyond the line. And that's okay. Different ways to draw this. One or one, and then two, three. I talked about this earlier, that we have a bull breakout here, and then bad follow through, a pullback. And that this resumption up, some computers see it as part of the pullback. Even though it's a new high in the bull trend, it could be part of the pullback that began with this bar. Some computers see this whole thing as a triangle, which means this big bull bar, in the minds of some computers, is part of the pullback from this initial breakout. Most wedges are not perfect. Any three push pattern qualifies, and therefore, most channels are wedges. By the time you decide that you have a channel in front of you, you have three pushes, and therefore, it's a type of wedge. And again, the closer it is to ideal, the higher the probability that you'll get a profitable reversal trade. Three pushes up, again, I connect point one with point three. If I use point one and point two, point three will not reach the line. And I like the reversal to be taking place at a line. So if I see this bull bar, and then a bare bar here, bare bar here, I think of it as a wedge. I draw a line, one, two, three, and I ignore bar two going above the top of the line, overshooting the line. Most spike and channel trends end with wedges. Strong bear breakout, so you think of it as a spike, and a first push and a potential wedge. One, two, three. Nested patterns are common. We have a big spike down here. We have a smaller spike down here. I mentioned that I think of wedges and channels as synonymous, and if they're convergent, I call them wedges. If they're more parallel, I simply call them channels. Reversal up, reversal up with a decent buy signal bar. Whenever I see two reversals, I start drawing lines. I connect the lows and extend the line, and see what happens if we reverse up here and come back down here again. I would have a potential wedge bottom. I want to see what happens if we come back down toward that line. Do we reverse up? We went sideways, and we've had another bear breakout. But look what happened when we got right next to the line. We have a doji bar, and then we have a micro double bottom. I think of this as a wedge, even though the shape of it is not all that good. The third push down did not quite reach the line, and therefore you have to be wondering, are we going to go a little bit lower? This is an undershoot. Undershoot means the push did not quite reach the line. Because traders are wondering if it's going to continue down a little bit further, buying above this bar, low probability. Higher probability to take a second entry buy. Here we have a micro double bottom, and a second entry buy with a decent buy signal bar. And the result, we got a very strong bull breakout, and at least a small second leg up. Again, as soon as I see two reversals, I draw lines. Reverse down, try to reverse down, I draw a line. And then I see what happens when the market gets back to that line, if it gets back to that line. And here we touched the line, went a little bit above it, and we have a bear bar. So this is a potential wedge top. Probably a minor reversal after such a strong breakout. Minor reversal means trading range more likely than bear trend. Small overshoot, that's a buy climax. We got the reversal. If you get the bull breakout, and a reversal down, you have an increased chance of a swing down. Especially with a pretty good sell signal bar here, and a decent entry bar here. The bars are pretty small here, so this looks like it's not going to go all that far, or all that fast. Usually, if I start to see this, if I short that, and then the market does this, I just get out. Reasonable to short below the wedge, spike pullback channel. Expecting a test of the bottom of the channel. But it took a lot of bars to get there. And as I said, I typically get out when the market starts to do that very tight range. Just because I see it as a wedge, does not mean that all the computers see it as a wedge. Also, different computers will use different reversals to create the wedge. A bull breakout and three pushes up, so a small wedge top. Other computers will say, well, maybe the wedge top is one, two, three, and we did not quite reach the third touch of the line. Maybe you want to call it an expanding triangle top. I don't know, but some computers will see the three pushes as one, two, three. Other computers will say, one, two, three. And not call it a wedge, simply call it a bull channel. And then look for a reversal down, especially a second reversal down. First attempt, and then second attempt. The market tried three or four times to break to a new high, and it's failing. Instead of finding buyers eager to buy the bull breakout, it's finding sellers. Every time it goes above something, it's reversing. Above here, reversing. Above here, reversing. Above here, reversing. The bulls and bears are agreeing that the price is too high. It doesn't matter if you call it a wedge, an expanding triangle, or channel. The market continues to reverse after every attempt to break to the upside. Usually then, the market tries to go the other way. It'll conclude it has gone too far up. Again, you can call it a wedge with a bad shape. You can call it an expanding triangle. A failed breakout above a wedge top. A wedge, one, two, three. It doesn't matter. The market's repeatedly trying to go up and failing. You have to be thinking, and may try to go the opposite direction, so traders will be looking to sell a reversal down. Either below that reversal bar, bull body, or higher probability, below this bear bar, closing nearest low. As I said, there are many ways to draw the lines, and different computers use different algorithms, and they draw the lines differently. Three pushes down. One, two, three. Other computers will say, the first push was here. One, two, three. This push down from here was followed by a new high. You have a bear channel, but markets often transition, and it's often a time when it's both in a bull trend and in a bear trend. And that's why you can get a bear trend beginning before the bull trend ends, because you get the transition phase when the market is in both. You can draw the line one, two, three, and call this an undershoot. Did not quite reach the line. As I said, if I see a reversal up from a third push down, I usually connect the first point and the third point when I'm in my chat room to illustrate the wedge. Repeated reversals on sell-offs. Traders will look to buy a reversal from a third push down. Here, different ways to draw the three legs down. Three pushes down. One, two, three. Not a very good looking buy signal bar, plus it's following two bear bars. Usually higher probability to wait for a second entry, which we got above this bar. A bull breakout. Bad follow through. First push down. Second push down. Third push down. An undershoot did not reach the line. And after this initial reversal attempt, we went to a new high. This bull bar, you can call it part of the bull trend, or you can call it part of the pullback from this initial breakout. Again, bull trends, when they transition into bear trends, usually have a period of time when it's both in a bull trend and a bear trend. Wedge bull flag. Bull breakout. Traders will buy above a bull bar here, here, and here. This is not a bull bar, but it's a wedge bull flag. Other traders will buy above this bar. A bull bar closing on its high. This entire sell-off, approximately a 50% pullback from this breakout. You can call it a wedge bull flag. You can call it a higher low major trend reversal. Traders are going to look to buy reversals up. Wedge top, one, two, three. With a bear eye eye, an inside bar with a bear bar. Traders will take that short. Micro double top, up here, and then down on that bar, and then up, and then down on that bull bar. I'm now going to talk about different types of wedges. Take a look at this. We have clearly a bear breakout, and a second leg down. But here, we have a bear breakout as well, but it formed a higher low. This, in fact, is a type of a wedge pattern. There are three pushes down. Had this low gone below that low, you would call it a wedge. But what happened here is this is an undershoot. The third pushdown did not fall below the second pushdown. In fact, it did not get anywhere near the trend line at the bottom of the wedge. However, the forces that form this pattern are the same as those for a wedge. When the bulls saw this reversal up, they knew there might be one more new low. However, they were so confident that there would be buyers below this low, that many bulls started placing limit orders above this low, just in case the market did not fall there. And the result was we have a higher low and then a reversal up. However, it's a three push pattern. One, two, three. If you want, you can call it a truncated wedge, but it is a wedge. And the bulls who bought here were buying because they assumed that if the market got below two, there would be a lot of bulls buying there. And these bulls were just front running the bulls who wanted to buy here. And the bulls who did want to buy the new low ended up having to chase the market higher. The bad shape, the lack of a wedge shape, the lack of a third push below the second does not matter. It's the same forces that create this as create a wedge. You can call it a higher low. It is a higher low, but it's really a variation of a wedge. The market tried to get a bear breakout three different times here, again here, and again here. And failed all three times. And then it decided to try in the opposite direction. That's exactly what happens in a wedge. The market makes three attempts down. However, typically the third push is below the second. All three fail. The market then decides it cannot go lower. So maybe it's gone too low already. And then it tries to probe in the opposite direction. When the bulls and bears are both confident that a third push down to a new low will create a wedge reversal, many bulls buy early. And a lot of the bears take profits early. The bears are selling reversals up, betting that they'll fail. They'll sell here. However, if they're deciding that this is too strong a buy setup, a very good bull bar here, chances are there'll be buyers below. A lot of the bears will take profits early because they do not want to take a chance that the market might form a higher low. So the bears are starting to scalp out early and the bulls are becoming very confident. A pretty good reversal here. Very good bull bar here. Really not a lot of strong selling. There's some, but look at all the bars to the left. This is a sell off, but very weak. Traders, both bulls and bears are now confident that there's not much left to this bear trend. And the result was a higher low instead of a lower low. But it's still a variation of a wedge. Too many traders trying to buy around that second low. Bulls trying to buy for a swing up. And bears trying to buy back their shorts. Take a look at this. We have a double top. We have a head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Or a double bottom, right shoulder. And we're getting a bull breakout above the neckline of the head and shoulders bottom. And a breakout above the double top. But think about what's going on. The bulls are trying to rally. They fail. They're trying to rally again. And they fail. And they're trying to rally a third time. And look what's happening. They're failing. This is a three push pattern. Anytime you have a double top and then a bull breakout, you have three pushes up. If that third push fails and the market reverses down, this is a variation of a wedge. And the computers will treat it like a wedge. Three strong pushes up, each one reversing. They'll bet that the market has decided it cannot go up. Maybe it has gone up too far. Maybe it now needs to go down and find what price is too low. Bears, they see a double top bear flag. They'll sell the reversal down. And a lot of them will put their stop just above the double top. And they'll get up here as the market is going above the double top. The bears will buy back their shorts. And the bulls will buy as well. The bulls see it as a bull breakout above a double top. And they expect a measured move up. However, the market then reversed down. A big tail and now a bear bar. Traders will start to sell. Bulls will sell out of their longs if they have not already taken profits. And bears will start to sell either here or they'll wait until after they see many consecutive bear bars. And now we have a low 2 bear flag. Low 1 below this bar. Low 2 below that bar. And they'll sell here. Higher probability selling after you see 3, 4, or 5 bear bars after the reversal down. But both shorts are reasonable here or here. We're selling closes on the way down here. 3 pushes up or down, that's not enough. They have to be strong compared to the other bars and the other legs. Context, the bars to the left have to make sense for a reversal. Otherwise, the market is only going to go sideways. Here we have a wedge. 3 pushes up. 1, 2, 3. But there's nothing to reverse. The market is really not going up all that much. It's simply part of a trading range. And therefore, the reversal down is probably going to lead to more trading range. Leg 1 up. Reversal down. Not all that strong up. Leg 3 up. Not all that strong up. Most computers will not consider this a wedge. There were not 3 strong pushes up. There was 1 strong push up here, but not 3 strong pushes up. Traders will see this more as legs within a trading range. And they'll expect more trading range. Not 3 strong attempts to rally that are failing. Here we have 3 pushes down. 1, 2, and 3. Or 3, or 3. However, it's in a tight trading range. There's really nothing to reverse. The market might go up, but more likely the tight trading range will continue. Markets have inertia and they tend to continue what they've been doing. And if it's been in a tight range for 15 or 20 bars, it's more likely to continue in a tight range than it is to get a bull breakout and a resumption of this small bull trend. If a pattern does not look right, computers will ignore it. And you should ignore it as well. In general, traders will call it something else. For example, if the reversals are all around the same price, traders will call it a triple top or a triple bottom instead of a wedge. If the context is good and if the legs are strong, it's still tradable. 3 pushes up. Maybe it's a wedge top. This is actually what I would call a small breakout of a small breakout. Here's a small breakout of this. This is a small breakout of that. It's mostly horizontal. And we have an attempt at a reversal down. There's a higher probability of a measured move up when you break above that. In general, if you break above any kind of a wedge, 50-50 chance you get a swing up, 50-50 chance you get a reversal down. But when the pattern is more horizontal like a trading range and you get a small breakout of a small breakout, it's closer to 60% chance of a measured move up, a swing up. Pretty good bull bars. Pretty good bull bars here and again here. Increasing buying pressure in a trading range. The odds are we're going to get a bull breakout and a swing up. You can also call this a head and shoulders bottom if you want. Left shoulder, a lower low head, and then right shoulder. You can call it a double bottom pullback, a double bottom, and then a pullback, which is a type of triangle even though this low is below that low. Many different terms with the same pattern. For me, it's mostly a small breakout of a small breakout where all three legs have good buying pressure. And there's an attempt at a reversal down after the third breakout attempt. The market's also in a broad channel. We're getting higher lows and higher highs. And there was room to the top of that channel. If you have legs within a tight trading range that are strong enough, you can get a minor reversal. For a scalp, in other words. But rarely will you get a swing trade. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Selling below this, we have a bare II. A bare inside bar. Inside bar. Inside of another. Inside bar. Inside bar. The sell here is probably going to result in simply another leg in the trading range and therefore a scalp and not a swing trade. Three pushes down. One, two, three. Not all that strong. A second entry buy probably would be a scalp. Here, the bulls got a break to the top of the range and then terrible follow through. Same thing here. Three pushes down. Not very strong. Basically in a tight trading range. If you're taking this buy, you're probably looking for a scalp up to the top of the range. None of these has a wedge shape, but they all function as a wedge. The market made three strong attempts to go one way and the breakout failed. The market gave up and tried the other direction. The same forces as in a wedge. But here the patterns are small and sideways. They're minor reversals leading to scalps. Usually when I see patterns like that that really don't look like wedges and the context is really not good for much of a breakout. I do not use the term wedge. I use other terms like a triangle or a triple top or a triple bottom. Or simply call it a tight trading range. Instead of worrying about a wedge here, I would simply call it a tight trading range. I mentioned earlier, a breakout above a double top that fails is a wedge top. If you have a double bottom and a bare breakout and it reverses up, you have three pushes down. Computers will treat it like a wedge. Here we have an attempt at a double bottom. And we have a bare breakout. Three pushes down. One, two, three. To me, it's functionally the same as a wedge. I could have drawn a line across here. You can call it a triangle. You can call it a wedge. But it's the same forces that a wedge has. Three pushes down. So if you get a breakout below a double bottom and it reverses up, it functions the same as a wedge. And you look for a reversal up. Here, in a tight trading range, you're not looking for much of a reversal. It turns out we got a pullback and then a second leg up. But in general, a breakout below a double bottom that reverses up is a type of a wedge because it's three pushes down and all three reversed up. The same here. We have a double bottom. And then we have a bare breakout. And it reversed up and it reversed up a second time. I would not call it a wedge. I would call it a double bottom with a failed breakout. However, it is a type of wedge. Three pushes down. All three reversing. Double bottoms. Bare breakout. Reverse up. They function as wedges. Here, double top. And a bold breakout that reversed down. It's three pushes up. One, two, three. And all three are reversing. The market's deciding that up is not the right direction. It has to probe lower. It's a type of wedge. However, I usually refer to this as a failed breakout above double top. Same thing here. We have a double top and a breakout. Three pushes up. One, two, three. And then it reversed down. You can call it a wedge. It's a type of wedge. It's the same forces as a wedge. A lot of traders would simply call it a triple top or a failed breakout above a double top. Or they would look at this and call it a tight training range and a failed breakout above the top of a tight training range. Big bear breakout. Closing below the low of the wedge. Closing below the low of the wedge. Closing below the low of the past 30 or 40 bars. Probably going lower. Traders will sell the reversal down. Or after this breakout. This is a bear flag. They'll sell below the low of this bar. Betting that the bear trend will resume down. It's higher probability to sell after you see a strong breakout. Athletic Cont�. FEAT. I made the point in this video that Wedges are rarely perfect. Also if they place up theז., would're analgisky pasa book. Back here. It's your best thing to add a time on the risk here to WhatsApp. Closing below the low of the low with the results. Over this breakout. On the favorite part of the bland caught waves. Hot zальное price. OV here. Much internal anchor prices. On the你番ers have thousands of shares. Noorestaciones. I applied總aits. Closing below the low trading. They have completamente auf my behemoth. We使用 this track down below the lower downside. The bar. Layer tentEs will Miami down to go to the next peak. The savoir with the scoring trait – if I sabes the bad Legisl. I made the point in this video that wedges are rarely perfect. Also, most channels, whether or not they're convergent, are variations of wedges. And then I talked about some variations of wedges, like failed breakouts above double tops and failed breakouts below double bottoms. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on wedges.