 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading in trading ranges. I'm going to begin by talking about how more experienced traders will enter with limit orders, how everyone should take profits. Trading ranges often test the open of the day later in the day. I want to talk about those tests. Trading ranges are often very tight. Most traders should not trade when the market is in a very tight range, but experienced traders often will enter with limit orders and scalp. Every trading range eventually ends and breaks into a trend. In general, in a trading range, you want to buy low, sell high, and scalp. Bulls are going to be looking for buy setups in the lower half, and bears will look to sell in the upper half. One popular way for traders to trade is enter with limit orders. When the market is in the lower half, they'll buy with limit orders at a prior low, and they're willing to scale in lower, and then they'll scalp. Here's another prior low, and they'll buy with limit order there. And here is a low, a minor low, but traders bought with a limit order there, especially since it's a potential micro double bottom in the bottom half of a trading range. Unfortunately, sometimes the stop is far away, but you have to use a stop that is reasonable. For example, putting a stop below the bottom of this three legged rally is a reasonable stop. And if you get stopped out, you can buy again on a reversal back up. Another alternative is we have a strong breakout here, and we reverse down. Theoretically, the bulls wanted to get a double bottom here, and instead the market's selling off. The bears want to get a measured move down. And therefore, putting a stop just below a measured move down is another logical stop. Some bulls will buy, rely on the wide stop, and buy more lower, hoping to get a test back up near the top of the range. If you are going to be entering with limit orders and scaling in, you have to trade smaller because you want to maintain your risk. You don't want the risk on any trade to be bigger than on any other trade. The reason why traders scale in is because it makes it more likely that they can make money. However, it requires a wide stop and it requires management. Both of those things can create anxiety when a trader is starting out. This is the kind of trade that only an experienced, consistently profitable trader should consider. Whenever you increase your position size, you increase your risk. However, you should always trade small enough so that your risk is no bigger than on any other trade. The minimum scalp in the e-mini is one point. If you're looking to scale in, you usually want to be scaling in at least one or two points below your original entry. An alternative to buying one point below is buying with a limit order at a prior low, as long as the second entry is at least as big as a scalp below the first. In the e-mini, the minimum scalp is one point. And therefore, if you do not take this second entry one point down from the first, and instead you look to buy at a prior low, you make sure that the second entry is at least the size of a scalp below the first entry. An alternative is you can buy a reversal up above a bull bar. This is a small bull bar. And it's also a second entry, first entry above this bar and then second entry here. That's a higher probability buy. Is it less than a point below the first? It can be. And some traders will take it if they're trading small enough. This is a high probability buy. It's a wedge bottom, reversal up, reversal up, reversal up. And it's a second entry buy. Most traders will only add on to a trade once. So they buy once and then they take one of these additional buys. So they'll take two entries. Some traders will add on a second or third time. So they add on here and then again, one point lower, again, one point lower still. If you're taking multiple entries, always make sure that your entries are small enough so that the entire risk that you're exposing yourself to is no greater than on any other trade. So if you're taking a trade, you want to make sure that the profit that you're taking is always at least as big as the minimum scalp size. So if two times your actual risk is less than one point in the E-mini, do not exit at two times actual risk. Make sure to exit at least at one point profit. Two times actual risk is the minimum needed to make the traders equation profitable. But just because it's the minimum acceptable to have a mathematically valid approach to trading does not mean it's the optimum. The minimum is rarely the best choice for anything in life. Working at the minimum wage is not a good choice. Let's say you bought above this reversal bar. You got a small wedge, one, two, three, bigger wedge, one, two, three, a micro double bottom. You have a bull body. That's a pretty good entry. If you bought above this bar, at this point, you know that your actual risk was one tick below this bar. Therefore, one times actual risk is right there. However, it did not reach your original entry. Just because it's a high probability trade and exiting at one times actual risk is a reasonable thing to do, does not mean it's the best thing to do. Remember, when you're scaling in, you usually want to exit at least at your original entry price or higher. That way, there you get out break even on your first buy and then with a profit on your second buy. So, a trader who did buy more here could get out there at his original entry price at that low. He bought at that low. It's back one tick above that low. That would allow him to get out break even on his first entry and with a profit on the second entry. It's a high probability buy since it's a second entry buy and a wedge, a nested wedge. Exiting greater than one times actual risk is mathematically good. So, this is a reasonable thing to do. Look at the size of the legs, up and down. The swings are pretty big. Therefore, exiting with one point profit is not necessarily the best choice. Another alternative is to enter with two times actual risk. That's always a good decision. It's still relatively small given the size of these legs up and down. Another choice is a trader might exit at one times actual risk based upon his first buy. He buys here. The market went down here. Once it reverses up, he knows that he actually had to risk to one tick below the low this bar. A measured move up from the low of that bar to his entry price is there. And you can see there was some profit taking there. If you want, you can try holding for two times actual risk, which is also at the top of the most recent leg down. Since the market keeps reversing at new highs, that is a logical place to sell. Bears will start selling there. So bulls should be taking partial profits there. Partial or full profits. Is it a scalp if you get up here? No, it's a swing trade. It's four points. You've sat through pullbacks here and here. It lasted about 10 bars. If you want, you can call it a scalp. But I would call that a swing. You put it on as a scalp and went up strongly enough. Some traders will hold part of the trade all the way up until the market reversed. And it went up far enough to call it a swing, even though you took it initially as a scalp. When the legs up and down are big like this, lasting 10, 20, or 30 bars up and down, covering a lot of points, traders can swing part of their position or all of their position because there's enough profit for them to make a swing up. At this point, we have nine bars in a very tight bull channel with no bear bars. The odds are traders will buy the first bear bar and the first reversal down and the market will go higher. The market's clearly always in long somewhere here before you get to nine bull bars. That means the market is likely to go higher. Since the market has been mostly sideways, it's also in a broad bull channel. We have a higher high and we have higher low. Traders like to take profits at a prior high, whether it's a trading range or a broad bull channel. In this case, it's also an expanding triangle and a micro double top that increases the chances that we'll get a deep pullback. And therefore, if you're trading in a trading range, you want to make sure that you're exiting. You want to sell high to take profits on longs and bears will sell high looking for a trade down. Three pushes up, one pullback, two pullback, three. And therefore, it's also a wedge channel, even though it does not have a wedge shape. That is another reason to take profits up there. A bear bar closing on its low. If you did not take profits with the limit order there, it's reasonable to take profits with a stop. One tick below that bear inside bar. Bears will start to sell there. Trading range days often test the open of the day, late in the day, after 11 o'clock in the final couple of hours. Especially if the open of the day is in the middle third of the day. Here's the daily chart. You can see it's sideways with lots of reversals every two, three, four bars. And a lot of bars close near the open. All of these pink boxes highlight bars that are closing near the open. When the daily chart is in a trading range, the five minute chart will have a lot of trading range price action. There'll be some trend days like here, but they'll usually reverse within a day or two. This is a five minute daily chart. Strong leg up, but strong leg down. Strong leg up, strong leg down. When the market is near the high, late in the day, you have to be prepared to sell because a lot of times, it will try to get all the way back down to the open. Look at all of these days that are highlighted in pink. at least half of the days ended up closing near the open. That means that if the market is far above the open, you have to expect a reversal down. If it's far below the open, late in the day, you have to be looking for a reversal up. And therefore, if you have a second entry sell, especially with a decent sell signal bar, it's a reasonable sell expecting the market to try to get down near the open, like it did during the majority of days over the past several weeks. The close just above the open, that means the body is small, the tail on top is big on the daily chart. The result is this trading range day is another doji day on the daily chart, like all of these days highlighted in pink. I mentioned earlier that when you get a late reversal back toward the open, it's more common if the open is in the middle third of the day. And you can see a lot of these days that are highlighted have a tail on top and on the bottom, but a small body. And the body is in the middle third of the day. Several days, five minute chart. I want to make the point that if you're trading with limit orders, buying below things in the bottom half, selling above things like prior highs in the top half, the market is very forgiving of limit order traders. In other words, you usually can make a profit and you can almost always avoid loss if you manage your trade correctly. When I say manage your trade correctly, what I'm talking about is if you can use an appropriately wide stop and especially if you can scale in. Even if you sell the absolute low in a trading range, if you manage your trade correctly, you usually can avoid a loss. When you look at this, you can say, well, how can I possibly avoid losing if I sold here? Well, if you manage your trade correctly, you usually can. You could sell more at about a 50% pullback of the last leg down or on a reversal down. And then exit at the midpoint between your two cells. You sold here, you sold more here or here. This is your average entry price. The market went below it. And therefore you could exit break even on the trade. You lose some on this and you make the same amount on that. And you end up getting out without a loss. And that's selling even at the extreme lowest price of the entire trading range. Even if you happen to buy the highest price, you can usually avoid loss if you scale in and use wide stops. For example, you could buy that high price and then place a limit order to buy more at a 50% pullback of this rally or on a reversal up, especially since it's a high two, high one, pullback high two and a bull bar closing on its high. Strong enough rally so that we're probably going to test this high. You could hold and try to get out break even at that high. So you get out break even on your first buy right here and a profit on your lower buy. And you can see the market selling off at that high because bulls who bought lower are selling here. The ones who bought up here are getting out break even. The ones who bought lower are starting to take partial profits. And the bears are selling as well. Tight trading ranges. Most traders should not trade them, but experienced traders will. A trading range is a horizontal channel and channels can be broad or tight. This is an example of an extremely tight trading range here. When the channel is fairly broad, when the trading range is fairly broad, traders can enter with stop orders selling below reversals down, buying reversals up. And they can sell at the market as it's going down. They can buy at the market as it's going up. And they can also enter with limit orders selling at a prior high and buying at a prior low here or below bad bear flags near the bottom. Often they'll use wide stops, swing stops, and they'll scale in. When the range is very tight like this, there's very little profit potential. Most traders should not trade. However, experienced traders will trade with limit orders. Selling above bars near the top, buying below bars near the bottom. Often they'll use wide stops, swing stops, and they'll scale in. A tight trading range, it's a limit order market. The range is too tight to make money with stops. And it's usually too tight to make much money even if you're a limit order trader. Most traders feel like it's too much work, too little profit, and it's better to wait. Wait for a broader range like this or for a breakout into a trend. The minimum scalp in the E-mini is 1 point, 4 ticks. To scalp in a tight range, you usually want most of the bars to be at least as big as a minimum scalp size. So you want most of the bars to be at least 4 ticks tall. And you want the height of the range to be at least 3 times the size of an average bar. Or 3 times the height of a minimum scalp. Therefore, you want the range to be at least 3 points tall. Can you make money in a range that's only 2 points tall? Yes, but it takes a lot of work. And a lot of times you have to wait through a lot of bars just to make 1 point. And you have to scale in. And it's not much fun. Most traders should not be trading at all when the range is this tight. But some experienced traders will. When it's very, very tight like this, most traders do not trade. They just let the computers trade. There's a lot of trading taking place. If you look at the volume of these bars, a lot of the bars have 5,000 contracts being traded. So the computers are trading. But if you're an individual trader trading your own account in a discretionary way, I think when it's that tight, it's not worth trading. Especially late in the day. You're tired. Not much time left to use wide stops and scale in. If you're going to be trading, you want to be selling with limit orders in the top half. And you're going to be scalping. So for example, here's a high one bull flag. But the market sold off at this price level several times. Therefore, you can sell at the high of that bar and scale in higher. Here's another high one bull flag. Some traders will place a limit order to sell at the high of that bar and get filled here and then take profit here. If you're a bull, you want to be buying below bear flags near the bottom. Here's a low two bear flag in the bottom half of the tight trading range. Some bulls will buy with a limit order below that bear bar or at the prior low, at this low. And then they'll scalp out for one point. Sometimes you'll get a small bull bar on the bottom of the trading range and you can buy with a stop and then scalp out. And if you're buying low enough, sometimes you can even make two points. But would I swing trade this? I would not. The range is very, very tight here. Unlikely to lead to a bull trend. If it does start to break strongly into a bull trend, then I'll start buying and swing trading. But until then, I'm going to assume the tight trading range will continue. And every time it goes up, it's going to go down. Every time it goes down, it's going to go up. I'm going to scalp, take quick profits. The trading range is a limit order market and you trade it like any limit order market. The bulls buy bear strength in the bottom half. So in other words, when they see a big bear bar, they're starting to look to buy. And the bear sell strong bull strength in the top half. So when they see big bull trend bars in the top half, the bear start looking to sell. And both take profits somewhere in the middle third. A lot of experienced traders will scale in, scalp and use wide stops. A strong bull close near the top of a developing range. Bears sell. They'll sell it. They'll sell it. Bidding against a successful breakout. They'll sell at a prior high. The market reversed down here. Bears will place a limit order to sell at that prior high. A prior high here, they'll sell there. It's in the upper half of the range. Some bears would sell at this high as well. To me, I think it's probably too low in the range. I'd rather be selling as close to the top of the range as I can. Some bears will sell at a prior high and they'll scale in higher. One point higher or two points higher. Or they'll sell on a reversal down below a bear bar. We have a bull flag, but it's near the top of a developing trading range. And the buy signal bar has a tail on top. Not a particularly strong buy. Some bears will place a limit order to sell at the high of that bar. Betting that it's a bad bull flag. And that we will reverse down far enough for them to make a one point scalp. Bulls will look to buy at prior lows in the bottom half of the range. Here's a prior low. The bears are trying to get a reversal. It's a trading range. Bulls will bet. The bear breakout will fail. So they'll place a limit order to buy at that low. And then they'll scalp out. And the same is true here. They'll buy at that low and scalp out on a bounce up. A prior low here, they'll buy at that low. Many will also scale in lower. So they'll buy at that low and they'll buy more one point lower. Expecting the market to go back above the breakout point. That would allow them to get out break even on their first entry. And with the scalper's profit, a one point profit on their lower entry. Some traders prefer to buy on a reversal up. A decent bull body and it's a wedge. One, two, three. And then buying above this bar, it's a micro double bottom. A second failed breakout below this low. Buying above this bar, it's a higher probability buy. Whenever you see a big bear bar closing near its low in the bottom of the range, bulls will buy the close, betting that the bear breakout attempt will fail, like here and here. A bear flag at the bottom of the range. We have a bear breakout to a new low. And we have a pullback, so a low line bear flag. But two bull bars and the sell signal bar, this bar, has a bull body and a tail on the bottom. It's a low probability sell. Bulls will place a limit order to buy at that low. All trading ranges eventually break out into trends. Trading range, so traders are looking to buy low, sell high, and scalp until there's a strong breakout up or down with good follow through. They'll bet that every breakout will reverse. The bulls have a breakout. So guess what the bears are going to do? They're going to sell it, betting that the bulls will not get consecutive bull bars. They'll also sell on a reversal down, especially micro double top. Bulls will buy this low, betting that the breakout below this range will fail and that it will be a wedge bull flag. Bull trend, wedge, one, two, three, four, and they'll buy more lower. We have two big bear bars. We have a third big bear bar here. If you bought there or here, what are you going to do? For me, when I see consecutive bear bars here and here closing on their lows and breaking below a trading range, I'm assuming we're going to get a measured move down. That it will be a measuring gap. Therefore bulls who bought this low and if they had a limit order to buy more lower and they get filled here, by the close of this bar, they're going to say, oh, consecutive big bear bars breaking below the bottom of the range. We're getting a bear break up below a bull flag and we have consecutive bear bars closing on their lows. The next bar here does not have a bull body. This is probably going to lead to a measured move down. And when that happens, you just sell out of your wrongs at the market. Don't try to get a better price. You just sell out at the market. The market's telling you that you're wrong. And whenever you're wrong, it's always better to get out immediately than hope to be able to get out a little less wrong. The bulls are giving up. That's what these two bars represent. And the bears know that the bulls are giving up and therefore the bears are selling, betting on a trend down and a measured move down. And they'll sell for any reason. They'll sell the close of bear bars. They'll sell a bull reversal up, betting that there'll be resumption of the bear trend and the bull reversal will fail. They'll sell below bars. If you're a bull and you're looking to buy with a limit order at the bottom of a bear channel, hoping that you're buying at the bottom of a trading range, you can only take that limit order by if you're able to get out when you decide that you're wrong. You don't want to decide down here that you're wrong. You want to decide by the close of this bar or the close of the next bar that you're wrong. And you just take your exit. You lose about a point here and you get out or break even on your second entry. This is difficult for beginners to do. They see this very strong trend. They see this as a bull flag in this strong trend. And they're in denial as the market's breaking to the downside. It can cost you a lot of money if you're unable to get out quickly. And that's another reason why only experienced traders should be trading with limit orders buying at the bottom of a trading range. Because sometimes the trading range becomes a bear trend as it did here, even if there was a very strong rally initially. Sometimes a breakout does not look all that strong, yet it continues up relentlessly. The market's center trading range. 50% chance that you'll get a bear breakout. We have a double top bear flag. 50% chance we'll get a bull breakout. A higher low major trend reversal. And a head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. 50% chance the first breakout, up or down, will fail and reverse. If at some point you decide that it's becoming a trend, stop trading it like a trading range. You have to trade it like a trend. Sometimes the breakout can be one huge bar or two medium sized bars. Other times it's just a series of small bull bars with very small pullbacks, a very tight bull channel. On a higher timeframe chart, this is a very strong breakout. And therefore, if you see a relentless, very tight channel lasting a lot of bars here, it's about a seven, eight, nine bar bull micro channel. The market is breaking out and the bears have to get out of shorts, even though we're at the top of a trading range. I talk more about breakouts that are made of very small bars, but lasting a lot of bars in the videos on trading breakouts. High or low major trend reversal. Head and shoulders bottom. 21 bars in an extremely tight bull channel and 10 of those bars, no pullback for 10 bars, a 10 bar bull micro channel. Even though the market lacks big consecutive bull bars, this is a trend based on time more than price. The bulls are owning a lot of bars. The bulls are in control for a lot of bars, even though they're not getting a big breakout. On a higher timeframe chart, this is a strong breakout. Traders have to begin to trade it like a trend and stop trading it like a trading range. Experienced traders will enter with limit orders and trading ranges, buying near the bottom, selling near the top. When you're taking profits, you have to be scalping for the most part. If the legs up and down are big enough to swing trade, you can swing trade part of your trade. But I would not bet on a successful breakout because of my 80% rule. 80% of breakout attempts will fail. If the market has had a lot of trading range days lately, today is probably going to be a trading range day. And therefore, if the market is far above the open late in the day, be prepared to sell a reversal down back toward the open. If the market is far below the open late in the day, look to buy a reversal up, especially a second entry buy. And especially if the open is in the middle third of the day's range. When the market is in a very tight trading range, most traders should not trade. But experienced traders will sometimes trade with limit orders using wide stops and scaling in. Even though my 80% rule says that 80% of breakout attempts will fail, eventually there will be a successful breakout. When the market begins to trend, stop trading it like a trading range. Accept what's going on and begin to trade it appropriately. Begin to trade it like a breakout. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading in trading ranges. The first is 10, when I with St. G onwards. When we bought estamos able to trade�ohokkas. You can find those ingredients on the2017. If while we bought a box for thriving however we could see them during the last two videos on Instagram! You can buy the A B trust In the L seeks. There are two fantastic vendors off woodased this one. It is a easy試 with shortlisted media. As it stays