 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the seventh of seven videos on protective stops. I want to talk a little bit about break-even stops. Traders use them regularly, but there's no mathematical basis for them. I also want to talk about the importance of breakout tests. The market goes your way and then comes back to the original entry price. And finally, I want to talk about stops for scalpers. Most traders should not be scalping, but everyone ends up scalping at least some of the time. The very best scalpers tend to use wide stops and scale in, but again, most traders should not be scalping. When a trader uses a break-even stop, what they mean is the market goes your way and then you move the stop back to around the entry price. It does not have to be exactly the entry price. Maybe you make a small amount, lose a small amount, but around the entry price. If the stop gets hit, you only lose the brokerage cost and maybe a little slippage. So a small loss, sometimes a small win. Sometimes you'll have the stop a little bit better than break-even. If you have a small loss or a small win, traders refer to that as a break-even trade. Let's say a trader sold here betting on a possible trading range and a double top and we have a small bear body here. The trade eventually goes his way. Some traders will hope for a swing trade and use the stop above the top of the bear leg. Other traders, after it goes their way, will decide that, well, it's gone far enough. I really don't want to come back to my entry price. If it does, I'll just get out break-even. So they'll lower their stop from up here down to just below the low of the sell signal bar. As I said, when a trader uses the term break-even or break-even stop, they don't mean necessarily exactly break-even. Although in general, when a person talks about a break-even stop, they're talking about putting the stop exactly to their entry price. In this particular case, let's say you used an exact break-even stop. You sold below the low of this bar. You got filled right here. The market went your way a little bit and you were not happy with the follow through and you decided, well, I'll get out if it gets back to my entry price. So you put a stop at your entry price and the market comes back, hits that price and you get filled here. And all you lose is the commission or maybe a bid-ask spread or maybe a little bit of slippage. I think one of the interesting things about a break-even stop is that there is no mathematical basis for a break-even stop. The main reason for using a break-even stop is that you're confused or you're upset. And whenever that's the case, it's okay to get out for any reason. And sometimes the easiest decision is simply to put your stop at break-even. Whenever you believe your objective is no longer reasonable, it's good to get out. And if the market is very close to your entry price, sometimes traders will quickly put their stop right at break-even. The reason why there's no mathematical basis to a break-even stop is that your stop choice is not related to your entry price. It's related to the price action. It doesn't matter where you sell above this bar, below this bar, below this bar, above this bar, below that bar, selling this close, selling down here. The stop is the same. It's above the top of the bare leg. To use a break-even stop, there's no mathematical basis to it. It's simply an emotional thing. Sometimes you're just too upset. The market's moving fast. You have to do something. You want to get out. A lot of traders just quickly move their stop to break even. And that is okay. We're people. We have feelings. We're not machines. And we take time to make decisions. If you feel like your premise is wrong, you have to get out. As I said, it's always best to select a stop based upon the price action. But a break-even stop does make sense when you're scalping. And in one other special instance, a second breakout test. A lot of times, traders will let the market come back to their entry price as long as the trend resumes. But they do not want the market to come back to their entry price a second time. If it does, it usually means the trade is no longer valid. In that particular instance, it then makes sense to exit with a break-even stop. Scalpers, a lot of times, will use break-even stops. They'll take a trade. The market goes to their profit-taking limit order price. They're very close to it. They do not want the market to come back to their entry price. So they'll quickly move their stop to break even. When the market gets very close to their target, then the risk is to their entry price or their original stop. It may be four or five times greater than the remaining reward. At that point, you need an extremely high probability to remain in the trade. And if you get a reversal or start to get a reversal, then the probability is no longer high. And therefore, the premise is no longer valid. You have very little reward left. You have a lot of risk relative to the reward. You need a high probability, but the market is coming back against you. And therefore, you do not have high probability. A lot of traders need to get out. And when the market's starting to come back, it's probably very close to the original entry price. Many traders just quickly move their stop to break even. Or maybe a tick better than break even. Maybe a tick worse than break even. For Forex traders, maybe a pip or two better or worse than break even. Let's say a trader sells below this bar. They can have a double top neckline hoping for a break below and a measured move down. The rally is not strong. It's probably a bull leg in a trading range. So they have a double top at the top of a trading range. Original stop probably above the top of this bar because it's also above the double top. And you're taking a short, believing that you have a double top, which you do. And let's say you had a profit taking limit order right here. You made some calculation that this was a good location to exit with a scalp. And the market came very, very close to your scalp. And it did not fill your order. And then it started to reverse up. What do you do? Some traders will exit on the reversal up or on the second reversal up. Other traders will give it time just in case we have one more push down. And a lot of those traders do not want the market to come back to their entry price. They do not want to take a loss after coming so close to a profit. They'll simply move their stop to break even and then they'll get filled right here. If a bear is very quick, he can move his stop down to above the high of this bar or above the high of this bar. And end up with a little bit of a profit. A smaller profit than what he intended to get, but better than having it come back to his break even stop. For example, the bear might try to exit above this bar, a small double bottom, a second reversal up from below this bar. Maybe he'll buy above the high of a bull bar closing on its high and get filled here. And end up with a small scalp, smaller than he intended. That's still basically a break even trade. It's a small profit, smaller than what the scalper intended. Most traders would call that a break even trade. Different ways to draw this. Some traders would see this as a wedge, three pushes down, one, two, three. I know this is a small push down, but it led to a big reversal up. It's a significant bottom. And then we're also testing this prior low. You can also call it a smaller wedge here. We have a double bottom and a bear breakout. So you have three pushes down, one, two, three. Anytime you have a double bottom and a breakout that reverses up, it's a type of wedge. And here we have a micro double bottom down, up, down, up. It's a reasonable buy, a good looking buy signal bar. It's a reasonable swing. The channel is too tight, probably for a scalp. Maybe you can get a scalp. Some traders would take this for a swing trade bidding that maybe we'll get a little bit of a wedge. Maybe we'll retrace 50% of the sell-off. The sell-off lacks consecutive big bear bars. It's probably a bear leg in a trading range. And we are reversing up near a potential bottom to the range. Maybe we'll get a couple legs up. Let's say we have an IOI here. He buys above the bull bar, gets filled here, and puts his stock below the low. There's a breakout, and then there's a pullback. To me, this is a breakout test. Even though it fell below the high of the signal bar, that means it fell below the entry price as well. This pullback is simply a test of the resolve of the bulls. It's testing the breakout above the high of this bar. If you're swing trading, most bulls will allow the market to come back below their entry price. They'll rely on their stock. However, once the bull trend resumes, we have another breakout, three consecutive bull bars. A lot of traders do not want the market to come back to their entry price a second time. If it does, they conclude the bull trend is not valid. If this pullback falls below that entry price or the signal bar high a second time, especially if it falls below this low, traders will assume that instead of a bull trend, the market is probably going to go sideways in a trading range or possibly even reverse down. We have a double top neckline. We could fall for a measured move down. This would be the break even stop. Just a little bit above the high of this bar. It's hard to see. You could say it's at the high of the bar. The market rallied the way the bulls expected. It tested the resolve of the bulls. It tested below the entry price and it's testing again. A lot of traders will get out if it hits that entry price a second time. They assume that if the bulls are good, they'll buy heavily right above their original entry price, trying to prevent the market from coming down, hoping to get a second leg up. Therefore, some traders, if the market goes their way, falls below their entry price and then goes their way a second time, they'll get out break even just above the high of that bar. The second breakout reversed up from above the top of the buy signal bar and it formed high or low major trend reversal. A double bottom, good bull bar here, bull bar here, and then a good bull bar here, and it led to a swing up. Bulls will buy above the high of this doji inside bar, and especially above the high of this good looking bull bar. This is, I would call, a perfect breakout test. It missed the break even stop by about one tick or one pip. The bulls defended their break even stops. They prevented the break even stops from being hit. That is a sign of strong bulls, and it increases the chances that they'll get a swing up. So once this starts to go up, bulls are confident we'll go higher. And that's why we got this big bull bar and a follow through bar. And the bears also gave up. This is bears giving up. They tried to get below that break even stop, believing that if they could, the bulls would give up. Instead, it's the bears who gave up. When there's a bull trend, bulls like to put their stops below the bottom of the most recent strong leg up, below the bottom of the most recent major higher low. Here we have a biclimax, a breakout. Some bulls will put their stop here, but this is a magnet. I usually use a wider stop down at the bottom of the bull leg. It's reasonable to put your stop here. The market often comes down and tests it. Very often, in fact, it goes a tick or so below it. And then it can reverse up. Whenever you get this strong bull breakout, strong reversal, you have big up, big down, big confusion. Usually the market goes sideways and then decides whether it's going to resume up or reverse down. When you have a perfect test of the bottom of the bull breakout like this and then a reversal up, you're probably going to get a test back up to the high. Big up, big down, big confusion, trading range likely. Bull leg in a trading range, bear leg in a trading range, probably going to be followed by another bull leg and another test of the top of the range. Bulls are trying to defend their stop. They know the bears want to break below the bottom of the final biclimax and then hope for a measure move down. The bulls hope for a test of that low, basically a double bottom. I know this is not the bottom of a sell off like this, bottom of a sell off, bottom of a sell off, but it's the bottom of a bull breakout. And therefore it's a type of bottom. And if the market comes down there and reverses up again, you have a double bottom. Two different types of bottoms, the bottom of a bull breakout and the bottom of a sell off, but it's still a type of a double bottom. Bulls place limit orders to buy just above that low and at that low. And they also place stop orders to buy the reversal up. And the same is true here. The market's coming back down to that critical price. The bulls will buy with limit orders at and just above that price and they'll buy on a reversal up. Their concern is if it falls below, their premise of a bull trend is no longer valid. The market will either remain in a trading range, maybe falling a little bit lower, or it'll reverse into a bear trend. We have a bull trend, a bear breakout, lower high major trend reversal. The bears have a reasonable sell pattern and the bulls are trying to prevent the market from falling below this higher low. It's also a neckline of a double top. Some bears will sell if it falls below here. You'll have the lower high major trend reversal bears happy that we're breaking below the neckline. And you'll have the double top bears selling betting that will fall for a measured move down. If you're buying right above this low or on the reversal up, your risk is small. And that usually means the probability is small as well. And you'll get stopped out a lot. However, if you do get stopped out and there's a reversal up from below this bar, the bulls will assume that we're at the bottom of a trading range. And therefore it's reasonable to buy again if they get stopped out. Strong breakout. A lot of bulls will buy around the bottom of this breakout because the bulls bought strongly here and we rallied strongly. If we come down to that price level again, they'll look to buy again near the price or as the market reverses up from it. Here we have a small double bottom testing the bottom of the buy climax. Bulls will buy clearly disappointed by this. And the bulls who put their stock just below this low get stopped out here, but that's okay. Bad follow through on the bear breakout. Bulls will buy a reversal up, betting that instead of a bear trend, this is a bear leg in a trading range. This is a reasonable location for the bottom of the range. There was strong buying here before. Maybe bulls will buy again if the market reverses up from that bear breakout. And therefore bulls will buy on a stop above the high of this bar. They'll get filled here. Again, another breakout. Bad follow through. Bulls will buy on a stop above the high of this bar and they'll get filled right here. As long as the premise is valid, bulls will keep buying on the reversals up. Their premise at this point is that we're in our trading range and they're buying a failed breakout below the bottom of the range. When they were buying here, their premise was that we were in a bull trend. When they bought here, they were hoping for a bull trend. But once we fell below here, I think the bulls changed and they started trading it like a trading range. Look to buy reversals up from below, looking for at least a scalp. The bears will do the opposite. When the market goes above a high, they'll assume it's a trading range now as well. Since we fell below key support, they'll look to sell at and above prior highs, betting that the breakout will fail and that will come back down. Some bulls will say, okay, it's a bull breakout. And yes, we fell below the low of the bull breakout, but we're still above the bottom of the bull trend. And instead of putting a stop just below here, they'll use a wider stop below this part of the bull leg or below the bottom of the bull trend. That's because bulls know that when you get a strong breakout, a lot of times the market comes down to the bottom of the breakout, sometimes a little bit below. Especially when the breakout is late in a bull trend, there's an increased risk that it's an exhaustion gap. For example, the gap below this low and the breakout point here probably will close at some point. It tried to close here. It did close here. And very often, I would say half the time, if you start to reverse down, you're going to get to the bottom of the bull breakout and usually a little bit below. And bulls do not want to get stopped out. They can and they can buy again on the reversal up. But a lot of bulls instead will look at this and say, yeah, it's not really a bear trend. It looks more like a bear leg in a trading range. Bear breakout, bad follow through. A second reversal up. Bear breakout, bad follow through. Bear breakout, bad follow through. And therefore, they rely on a wide stop and they'll buy on reversals up and scalp out. They don't want to keep getting stopped out like buy here, stopped out, buy again here. They'll buy here and leave their stop down here and then maybe get out here on the reversal down. Basically a break even trade. But they're hoping instead that the market went up higher and they could make a scalp. But sometimes it does not. We have a double bottom, a neckline, a strong breakout and a perfect breakout test of the breakout point. We got a pullback from the breakout and this is a potential measuring gap. The market is trying to resume up. Perfect breakout test of this high. So maybe we get a measured move up from either of these lows to here and then up there. We have a second breakout test and it did not hit the breakout point. It's slightly above this high and that's bullish. We have a decent bull bar here. The bulls defended their break even stop and that's a sign of strong bulls. This is a double bottom bull flag. Bull trend, a pullback to a double bottom bull flag, a decent buy bar. The problem is all of the small sideways bars, all the small dojis. This looks like it's more of a tight trading range than a bull flag. But it is a reasonable bull flag and the bulls have a reasonable chance that the market will accelerate upward. And then trend resumption up, maybe for a measured move based upon the height of the gap between this high and this low. The second test is, I think, a really good test. Perfect test. It missed the entry price. Had you bought on a stop above this high, you would have been filled a little bit above that line. This pullback hit the line. It would have triggered a break even stop. And this pullback missed the entry price had you bought on a stop above this bar. You would have been filled just a little bit above this line, maybe on that close. And this high is above that close. So this is an absolutely perfect breakout test. Perfect in the sense that it got to within a tick or a pip of your entry price, but it did not hit your entry price. So it did not hit your break even stop. That's a bullish thing. Yet the reversal up was weak. Instead of a strong bull trend, it looks like a bull leg in the trading range. A lot of traders will exit if it comes back down to their entry price again. Here it fell below this bar. Most traders would get up either below this bar or below this bar. The bulls had a pretty good double bottom bull flag after a bull trend. And they don't want it to come back down a third time. And they'll get up on a stop and get filled here, right below the low of the double bottom. The bears see this as a double top. We have a bull trend, a bear breakout, and a tight trading range. Whenever you have a double top and a tight trading range like this, and the tight trading range lasts 20 or more bars. Especially if you get a decent sell signal bar, the bears have a 40% chance of a swing down. And that's what they got. The market fell for about a measured move down based upon the height of this double top. Double top. There's the top of it. Here's the neckline. The neckline is actually right here. But this is obviously a key price. So you could argue it's the bottom of a trading range. The bears will look for about a measured move down to take profits. And you can see they took profits here. Other bears took profits here. When you're scalping, everything is important. Every little mistake can cost you money. And the stock that you use is very important. Very few traders can make a living as scalpers. And the reason is you need to take the best trades. And it's usually better if you're willing to trade fairly large. And most traders cannot do that. If you're only going for a small profit per contract per trade, you need to have a large position if you're planning on making a living doing that. One of the fundamental problems with scalping is on most of your trades, your stop has to be further than your profit taking limit order. Your risk is usually bigger than your reward. And that means you have to win 70, 80 or 90% of the time. There are traders who can do that, but most cannot. And you should assume that you are like most good traders and you cannot do it. Or if you can do it, it's not fun to do it. And therefore it's not realistic to assume you'll be able to do that for a living year after year. Let's say a trader sold here. We have a breakout above this high. First entry, second entry. You can call it a wedge. One, two, three, parabolic wedge. A decent sell signal bar. But then we get this. We got a reversal up. So now we have a double bottom and a bull bar. The trader sold below the spare bar. And he's buying above this bull bar. And then maybe he's selling here or selling there. He's not making any money. Stop entries in a tight trading range. A losing proposition. You should never do that. Even if you're a scalper. Once you start to see a series of three, four, five small bars in a tight trading range with prominent tails, you should not be entering with stops. And most traders should not trade whatsoever. He sells here and maybe uses a tight stop and gets out above here. So he's losing money. He sells here, gets out above here. He buys here. He gets out, you know, maybe below here. He sells here. He gets out above here. He sells here. He gets stopped out there. He buys here above a bull flag and he gets stopped out either below there or below here. You can see the problem. If you're scalping for a small profit and you're using a tight stop, you can easily lose a lot of money. Here we have a series of five scalps. All of them were losers using stop entries. As I said, whenever the market's in a tight trading range, you should not be trading. And anyone who is trading is trading with limit orders. Using stop orders in a tight trading range is a horrible strategy. Most swing traders take occasional scalps, but you should really be focusing on swing trading. That allows you to use a reasonable stop and you only have to be right 40% of the time because you're going for a swing, which means a reward that is at least twice as big as your risk. And that offsets the low probability. It's a profitable approach to trading. Really good scalpers can do something to increase their probability. What they do is they can use a swing stop and scale in. But as I said, most traders are not comfortable doing that. It's not fun. You have to be enjoying your job. And therefore, most traders should not be thinking about scalping. It's stressful and very few people have the personality that allows them to scalp every day, year after year. I talk about scaling in in the videos on scaling in. Here we have a strong breakout above a bear channel. We have a series of three bull bars closing on their highs. It's reasonable to buy the close. This is a buy the close bull trend. And you know where the stop has to be. Below the bottom of the bull breakout. Either below this bar or below that bar. A swing trader almost always has to use a wide stop. Sometimes they'll have a great signal bar and you can use a stop just beyond the signal bar. But more often than not, a swing trader is using a relatively wide stop. The trader can buy here. And then at the end of the session, the market's on a tight trading range. You have a bear bar. It's reasonable to exit below that bear bar. Get filled here. And you made a swing profit. A lot of scalpers use wide stops. Like a swing stop. For example, we have a high two bull flag. We have a bull trend. A high one. And then we got a second entry here. A high two. Ultimately, it ended up as a wedge. Three pushes down. One. Pull back two. Pull back three. This low is below that low. If you bought above this bar and you put your stop here, you lost money over here. One of the problems with scalping, especially using a stop entry in a relatively tight trading range. What some scalpers will do is use a wide stop. Either below the bottom of the bull breakout or, better, below the bottom of the entire bull leg. They're not planning on having these stops be hit. They'll get out before these stops are hit. But those are catastrophic stops that protect you against some kind of catastrophe. Like if something happens in your house and you have to leave your computer for a period of time. Or your electricity goes out. Or your broker has problems. Or problems with the exchange. You want to make sure that there's some stop that protects you against some big move against you. A low probability move. A black swan type of event. Some of these scalpers, relying on these wide stops, are looking to buy more. Here, now we have a wedge. We have a micro double bottom. And three reversals up. One, two, three. Three legs down. One, two, three. A decent buy bar here. And a micro double bottom. Reasonable to buy more here. We have a breakout and a pullback. Reasonable to buy more here. The scalper is not going to buy all of these buys. Especially since these are right around that price. But sometimes the scalper who buys here might buy more here or here. As the market went up, his actual risk, if he bought here, was to just below the low of this bar. The scalper does not know that his actual risk is here when he takes the trade. He knows it when the market starts to go his way. He had to risk a little bit more than from his entry price to below this low to not have been stopped out. Once the market goes his way, he then knows this is his actual risk. And this is one times his actual risk. He's scalping, so he's going to go for a reward that is at least as big as his minimum scalp. And he also wants it to be at least as big as his actual risk. This is a reasonable location to take profits. I talk more about this in the videos on actual risk. We have a strong bull breakout, a buy the close type of rally. It's reasonable to buy that close or this close as well. Again, stop choices below the bottom of the breakout. I usually put the stop below the bottom of the bull trend because the bottom of the breakout is a magnet and the market often comes there or a little bit below, yet then resumes up. Sometimes it breaks below and falls for a measured move down. But most of the time, if it breaks below, it either goes sideways or up. Let's say a trader bought here looking to scalp and this did not quite reach his target. And he's disappointed by the tail here and the reversal here. He can either exit below the low of this bar and get out around break even, or he can use a swing stop either below here or down here. And look to buy more if the market reverses up. He'll assume it's a bull flag and that we'll get a second leg up. He might buy more with a limit order at a 50% pullback of this bull breakout and he'd get filled there. Or he might buy more above a bull bar and get filled above this bull bar right here or above this bar and get filled right here. He might be so disappointed by the size of the sell off that he's giving up on the intention of making much of a profit. He'll get out break even on his original entry and then with a tiny profit on his second entry. In general, if a trader is scalping and looking to scale in, his second entry should be at least the size of a scalp lower than his first. So that when the market comes back to his first entry, he can make a scalper's profit on his second entry. I talked about break even stops, putting a stop to around your entry price. There's never a good mathematical basis for using them. However, sometimes emotionally, it makes sense. If you're trying to get out because you think your trade is no longer valid and the market is very close to your entry price, a lot of traders will quickly move their stop to their entry price, a break even stop. If they make a little or lose a little on that stop, they still call it a break even stop. I also talked about breakout tests. The market goes your way and comes back to your entry price. Traders will usually allow the market to come back to their entry price once. But if the trend resumes in your direction, they do not want it to come back to your entry price a second time. Because if it does, they'll question the premise of a trend. I then talked about stops for scalpers. And one of the difficulties for scalpers is that the reward usually is less than the risk. And a lot of very good profitable scalpers use wider stops like a swing stop, and they're willing to scale in to increase their probability, accepting that it increases their risk as well. One of the big problems that beginners have when they scalp is they're using stops that are too tight, or they're entering with stops and tight trading ranges, which is a horrible strategy. They're going to lose money. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the seventh of seven videos on protective stops. Sometimes I'm