 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos on always in trading. In this video, I'm going to be talking about scalping and swing trading based upon the always in direction. Whenever the market's in a trend, traders can trade in that direction for any reason. For example, here we're starting to break below a bull channel and we have four consecutive bear bars closing on their lows. Maybe by this third close, traders see it as always in short. So traders will start to sell for any reason. They'll sell at the market. A lot of times they'll wait for the bar to close and then sell at the market and they get filled on the open of the next day. Remember, always in trading is a way to help you trade. A lot of traders are always struggling about when should I enter? Well, you can enter on any bar of the chart. On any chart, any timeframe, always in trading helps you enter in a direction where you have a better chance of making money. If you can tell the current direction of the market, whether it's long or short, going up or down, you can simply enter at any time for any reason and use the appropriate stock. Trade small enough so that if you lose, you do not lose more than you do on any other trade. So always in short, we're getting a bear breakout below a bull channel. We tried to get a bull flag, tried to break out twice, failed. And now we're getting a series of consecutive bear bars closing on their lows. Probably the bulls will give up here. And those who do not, we're looking for any kind of bounce that would allow them to exit with a smaller loss. And the bears who did not sell are looking for a bounce so that they can sell as well. So after a breakout like this, reasonably strong odds are any pullback will be followed by at least one more leg down. What can a scalper do? Well, you can sell at the market, take profits, sell next close, take profits. If there's a pullback, sell the pullback, sell the reversal up, sell the reversal back down. And use the appropriate stock, which is usually a swing stock. So the initial risk is actually much bigger than the profit target. But the actual risk usually is not. The probability is high enough that you'll make money by shorting that the math is okay. So for example, if you sell anywhere in here, the stop is up here at the top of the most recent major lower high. Lower high that led to a strong bear breakout. And we got a pause, an inside bar. You can sell below the low of that bar. You could sell the close of the pause bar, arguing that it's an attempt to reverse, and reversal attempts will fail. Likewise, you can buy above bars. Again, stop entries sell below bars, betting that the trend will continue down. Even here, your stop is above the top of the most recent reasonably strong bear leg. This is probably a major lower high. Maybe this is more major because it has a stronger breakout. But if you sell here, you hold short whether you're scalping or swing trading. If you're scalping or swing trading, you may want to add on below this bull bar, micro double top, up, down, up, betting on trend resumption down. Now a scalper, he's looking for quick profits exiting within a bar or two or three or four. Now if a scalper saw this and decided always in short, and he decided to trade it with a series of scalps, he would have one, two, three, four scalps. And if he managed them all correctly, he would end up with a pretty good profit. The problem is that a lot of traders trying to scalp, they'll take one and take their profit, and then they'll fail to take the second, third or fourth entry. He'll end up not taking enough entries, and he'll end up with one or two scalps profit, which is far less than what a swing trader would get. Swing trader would sell here, here, or any reason, and hold as long as the market is always in short. So for most traders, when there's a clear trend, they will make more money by swing trading than by scalping. Let's say a swing trader decided not to sell these closes, he waited for a pullback, an inside bar, and he sold below this low. And he held until the end of the day, somewhere down here. The market never clearly became always in long, not even here. No consecutive big bull trend bars, no rally above a prior lower high. There's no strong reason to exit here. If he did exit, he would get short again below a bear bar and sell on this bar as it fell below that bear bar. Otherwise, he would hold until the end of the day and get out here. And he will have made more money selling here and exiting here than a scalper, even though there were four scalps, one, two, three, maybe four. As I said, traders trying to scalp when the market is trending usually do not take enough trades to end up making as much as a swing trader. Here we have a bear trend, but it's weak. It drops for a few bars, goes up for a few bars. It's making lower lows, lower highs. There's a bull buy here, there's a bull buy here, probably not. There's a bull buy above this bear bar. It's hard to tell. Therefore, most of the time when you're trading, you're confused. You're never really certain when a reversal is strong enough to conclude that the always in direction has changed. Or sometimes you conclude it after the market has already gone fairly far. For example, maybe always in long here, maybe always in long here. You don't buy the reversal. You wait for higher probability. You wait for a breakout follow through, series of bull bars. A lot of traders prefer to wait for a higher probability trade. Instead of buying here, here, or here, we'll wait for that or for that. At that moment, the probability is higher that the market is going higher. These traders enter for whatever reason at any time, and they stay in the trade until there's a clear opposite trend. The bear who sold here, or for any reason, you would hold short, maybe get out above here. Micro double bottom, wedge, one, two, three. Does not matter that this is above that. You can call it a double bottom and a breakout that failed. Reversing up, reversing up again. The bear who sold anywhere in here would get out maybe here or here. And the bull who bought here or here would hold, well, I think he would continue to hold all the way to the end there. So big bear breakout bar closing far below a bull channel and below the low of the past 10 bars. Who knows how many bars there are to the left there? But a huge bear trend bar, most traders believe the market's going lower, so it's always in short. Even though the follow through bar is the bull bar. A lot of traders will just sell at the market as soon as the bar closes, so they sell the close. Double bottom, do the bears get out above this bull bar? Most would not. It has a pretty big tail on top. Looks more like a trading range than the start of a bull trend. Wedge bottom, one, two, three. Whenever you have a double bottom and a breakout, and the breakout reverses up, it's a wedge bottom. Three pushes down, one, two, three. And now we're getting a higher low major trend reversal. Probably not enough bars. We're up five or six bars and only down five or six bars. The pattern might not be big enough for a major reversal, but it might be. A lot of the bears would get out. We have a double bottom, high or low, double bottom pullback. We call it a triangle. We have a wedge bottom, one, two, three. Try to reverse up twice, pull back, not a strong sell-off. The bears will be getting ready to get out, and they might get out above here. They might wait for this bull close. They might even get out here. They might have a lower And, but sometimes small patterns the trade roll will be pulling. Now the other way, this pattern will fade by. So we're going to turn off a really high credit for a trend in the buy market leading. the double bottom higher low triangle and then a bull breakout above the bear channel which bottom one two three or one two three different computers use different bars or one two three a lot of times you'll get wedges that when they're setting up it's so obvious it's going to be a wedge the third push does not fall below the second so a lot of traders would see the wedge as one two and three where the third leg could not fall below the second and the reason that happens is when the Rockets obviously trying to form a wedge traders will be very eager to buy and they're afraid that we might get a double bottom or a higher low so instead of waiting to buy below this low they'll start buying as the markets going down and if enough of them do it the third push down does not fall below the second you can call it something else you can put a double bottom you can go higher low major trend reversal but I think of it as a wedge there are one two three and three too many traders front ran the buy and they bought before the market fell below the prior low and reversed up some beers might sell here and then get out somewhere over here and other traders want more trades they're willing to take a lot more trades hoping that we can make more profit they don't mind the extra decisions that you need to make if you're entering and exiting entering and exiting repeatedly as long as they can make them correctly and they're happy and comfortable trading that way it's certainly an okay thing to do here we try to reverse up one leg two legs three legs so much bottom strong enough breakout for a second leg down well that's a second leg down that could be the end of the trend I think the channel down is very tight only one significant bull bar on the way down so this is probably a minor reversal buying above this bull bar and a minor reversal usually leads to a trading range the bull bar and a bull bar are you convinced it's always in along here no the bulls need to do more if you're a bear you sold here and you reverse along here and we're still always in short you have to look to sell again usually you wait for a bear bar and sell on the stop below its low this is only a doji so not a strong sell double top bear flag right here and here double top bear flag but doji signal bar not good however at this point we have a bear bar closing near here it's low you can call it a triangle first push up second push up third push up fourth push up and then you get a bear bar that would be a place where I think a lot of the bears would sell again and the bulls who bought here would sell there as well if you sold here and you get out here you got to get short again if you're always in trader if you're trying to stay in the market all the time you have to get short when the market starts to turn down below a bear bar when the market never really became always in long we got a triangle three pushes up one or one and then two or three or three and a bear bar closing below its midpoint I think the bulls get out there and they always in bears if they get out here they have to sell again here big bull breakout closing far above the high of the past 10 or 20 bars so the market's clearly always in long despite this terrible follow through and therefore traders will buy for any reason a lot of traders when they see a breakout bar like this they'll buy it at the market other traders wait for the bar to close and if it closes near its high they'll buy at the market they get filled in the open of the next bar so you buy that close you buy the bear close betting that the bear reversal will fail buy below the bear bar betting the reversal will fail buy above the bear bar betting that the bull trend is resuming no matter how you do it the odds are we're going up and that will work for at least a measured move or about a measured move based from the open of this bar to the close of the breakout bar up here would be the target now if you're a bull scalper easiest thing to do is every time you see a pullback in a bull bar you buy on a stop just above the high you get filled here another pullback bull close near its high you buy on a stop above that bar get filled here and the same is true here and here we've got a triangle three pushes down one two three you can call it a wedge you can call it a high two bulls will buy above that bar and here's a pullback from the breakout of the triangle very small pattern if you draw a trend line across these two highs we have a bull breakout chances are the pullback will be a bull flag and we'll get at least a second leg up this is a euro versus the dollar five minute chart and the range is fairly big so a lot of traders instead of scalping for 10 pips might scalp for 20 pips so if a trader bought here he'd get out 20 pips higher same here get out 20 pips higher each of these blue boxes is 20 pips so if he bought on a stop above that bar this went up more than enough for him to get out with 20 pips again again so he ended up with 60 pips profit a couple of the times like buying here he'd probably get out around break even buying here same thing maybe get out break even of the six trades four were profitable and two were break even one two three four five and then it's five trades and if he managed them correctly he would make 60 pips the problem is that's a big if will he manage them all correctly hard to do and will he take all five hard to do he probably will not make 60 pips as a scalper on the other hand let's say a swing trader bought here and he just held as long as the market was going up and as long as he believed his premise was valid we got a triangle here up and down here some down here down here down here the bull breakout of the triangle now we have a wedge top one two three and we have a bull trend bear breakout higher high major trend reversal micro double top and a bear sell signal bar a lot of bulls will get out below that bar or below this double top and a lot of bears will start to sell there bulls bought here and exited there and that is 78 pips the trading was easier than for the scalper and the profit was greater most traders in general when they see a reasonably strong trend like this should swing at least part of their position because the odds are very good that they will make more money swing trading than scalping even though theoretically they might make about the same here's the euro versus a dollar 60 minute chart clearly always in long not enough to make it short so it's still always in long traders will buy pullbacks either above that bar or above this bar however we traded down here for five hours so it might be always in short on the five minute chart this rally is this and we have a wedge one two three and a lot of the bulls will sell to exit and a lot of bears would sell to go short looking for a couple of legs down one pullback maybe two maybe two but a swing trader here on the 60 minute chart would not get out an aggressive trader he'll look at five minute chart and he'll get out and maybe sell for the scalp down the important point here is just because you're always in long on one time frame does not mean you're always in long on a smaller time frame and some traders will switch to the smaller time frame and get out or even take the short in general that's not how I trade if I'm trading a 60 minute chart I only make decisions based upon the 60 minute chart and if I'm trading a five minute chart I'm only interested in what's going on with the five minute chart in this video I talked about swing trading and scalping when the market is always in long and most traders will make more money if they swing trade because they will not take all the scalps or they will not manage the scalps properly so if the market is trending and it's clearly always in long or clearly always in short most traders should simply swing trade this is Al Brooks and this is the third of three videos on always in trading thank you for watching the Brooks training course