 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on trading in the middle of the day. There's often a late test of support and resistance about two-thirds of the way through the day with a couple hours to go and that often leads to a trend up or down at the end of the day. And then remember my 80% rule. 80% of the time, a trend reversal will fail. 80% of the time, if the market's in a trading range, a breakout attempt will fail. This is a trading range and it lasted about five and a half hours. One of the important functions of the middle third of the day is to test some support or resistance and then the reaction up or down from that test often leads to a trend in the final third of the day. Again, when I talk about thirds, I'm not talking about an equal number of bars. I'm talking about portions of the day. Traders tend to look for a swing on the open or in the first couple of hours and they tend to look for a swing at the end of the day, the final couple of hours. Everything in between is the middle. Any type of support and resistance like a prior day's high or low, last week's high or low, a trend line, measured move target, any type of support or resistance could get tested at the end of the middle third of the day and lead to a trend up or down at the end of the day. In this particular chart, I'm going to use the open of the day as an example of important support or resistance. When you have a day that's a trading range day, trades below the open, trades above the open, the open of the day is often a magnet at the end of the day, which means that if the market's above the open, it will very often sell down and test the open. If it's below the open, it will very often rally up and test the open. It's more common if the open of the day is in the middle third of the prior day, but it often happens as well, even if the open's at the low of the day or the high of the day. Here, the bulls got a breakout. They have a higher low, hoping to get a trend up. And when the market got near the high of the day, traders sold it, expecting one more test down to the open. It did not quite get there, but it was still a sell off that tested the open of the day. Three things that can happen after the test of the open. The trading range can continue for the remainder of the day. The market can reverse up from support and close on the high and become a bull trend day like today, even though when you look at the five minute chart, it's not much of a bull trend. On the daily chart, the day opened near its low and closed at its high and was a bull trend day. And the third possibility is it could fall below the open and close on the low of the day and be a bear trend day. And the opposite is true if the market was below the open in the middle third of the day. It would then typically try to test back to the open. And same thing, it could break through and close on the high. It could reverse back down, close on the low, or it could stay sideways. And the day could be a doji day on the daily chart. Tested the open here, sold off. Traders sold it expecting the test of the open. It's a trading range day. Open is in the middle third. The rally is not that far above the open. Traders will sell looking for a test of the open. And then one of three things will happen. Either it goes sideways. Or it will reverse up from support and close on the high like it did today. Or it will break below the support of the open and close near the low and create a bear trend day. Sometimes you'll get a trend day. The close is on the high. The open is near the low. But the day is small. A small bull trend day. For example, if today closed right here, it would be a bull bar on the daily chart. Open here. And then the close above. But it would not be a big bull trend day. And it would not increase the day's range that much. Here we rallied some. Not all that much. It did increase the day's range. Rarely, if you have a very small trend for the first two thirds of the day, you can get a very big breakout into a big trend up or down. Very often it will rally or sell off for a measured move based upon the height of the range. Near the high of a trading range day. Open of the day in the middle third. Traders expect a sell off. And you can see everyone sold here. The bulls gave up. The bear sold. Looking for a test down to the open. We have two very big bear trend bars. But bad follow through here. Weak follow through here. Reversing up from just above the open. Here the market is in a small pullback bull trend. But it failed to get above the high. Even if it got a little bit above the high. And not much above the high. You have to be aware that the open is a magnet. And the day is mostly a trading range day. And the bulls often finally give up. And they can create big bear trend bars like this. However, they could simply be bulls giving up. And a sell vacuum down to support. Where the bulls will try to buy again. The bulls bought around support. In fact, just above support. They were so eager to buy. Instead of placing a limit order at the open. They started placing their limit orders. Two or three ticks above. You don't know that when the market is falling. However, once it reverses up. You realize that the bulls were very eager. They were buying above the open. They were so confident that. It might not get to the open. Or below the open. That they placed limit orders to buy above. The result was. These very two big bear bars. Were simply a sell vacuum test of support. And support held. The bears gave up. And the bulls bought. The sell off ended the middle third of the day. You don't know that until you get the reversal up. Once you start to get the reversal up. By the third or fourth bar. You know the market is back to always and long. And that tells you that the market is beginning. An attempt at a trend for the remainder of the day. Which means. The final third of the day began here. And that means the middle third of the day ended here. For me. This was the initial rally. And then this is the middle third of the day. And then this is the end of the middle third of the day. The bears tried to get a bear trend starting the day day and they failed. So, And then this is the middle third of the day. And then this is the end of the middle third of the day. The bears tried to get a bear trend starting here. They wanted the final third of the day to begin here. And they failed. The final third of the day instead began here. year. Once you get that rally, traders decide that we're going to close above the open and we'll get a bull trend. They don't know how big a bull trend, but they're confident that the market is going to trend up into the end of the day. Some bulls, as I said, would place limit orders at the open of the day, betting that if it falls below, it'll only fall a tick or two below and maybe form a double bottom here, especially after such a strong reversal up here. The market is likely to form a double bottom when it tests back down here. And it did. This is a double bottom with that low. It's a higher low double bottom, but it's still a double bottom. Bulls will place limit orders just above support or at support. Here we know after the rally that there were a lot of buy limit orders just above the open of the day. Some traders buy after they see the reversal up or they wait until they see three or four bull bars and then they buy at the market or they buy closes. Other traders will put a smaller timeframe chart up and buy on a reversal up on a one minute, two minute or three minute chart. Traders who buy with this limit order, they'll have their stop below here, betting that if it's going to trend up at the end of the day, it should not fall below this low. It should form a double bottom. Other traders will keep their stop below the bottom of this initial bull reversal because sometimes it'll fall a little bit below this low and they don't want to get stopped out. If you did use the tight stop and the market fell below that low and reversed up, traders would buy again on the reversal up. High two bull flag, two legs down, one pull back two and went above this bar, a high one buy. But that bear bar is so big, most bulls are not going to buy above that bull bar, especially when there's a magnet pulling the market down. This bear bar is likely to have at least a small second leg down, which it did. This became a high two buy signal bar. Bear body, not good, but location is good. Some traders prefer to buy above a bull bar and they would have bought above this bull bar and got filled here. Other traders prefer to buy closes after there are three or four bull bars closing at or near their highs. That's a sign that the bulls are controlling the market for time. Three bars, 15 minutes, four bars, 20 minutes. That's a sign of strong bulls. Other traders like to buy pullbacks. Once they see this strong reversal up, they'll look to buy a pullback. This is about a 50% pullback of this rally. It's also a test of the 20 bar exponential moving average. And it's also two small legs down, one pull back two. A bear bar, not great, but we're always in long. And it's testing support, the moving average and a 50% pullback. And then same here, two legs down, one pull back two. So this is a high two buy signal bar for a small rally for the remainder of the day. So this is a high two bull trend. Very strong bull trend, very little overlap. And then it entered a triangle. We have a bull bar. Traders will buy above the bull bar looking for trend resumption up. So bull trend, trading range, trend resumption up. We have a breakout and a pullback from the breakout. Other traders will buy above that doji. Some traders prefer to buy above a bull bar. They'll buy above that bar. Whenever you have a triangle late in a bull trend, it's often the final bull flag, which means if you get a strong breakout, the market will try to get back to the apex of the triangle. And then we have an added magnet here, the big round number, 2000. If we get above it, the market will try to get down to it. If we get below it, the market will try to get up to it. Look what happened here. We opened here, we sold off, and we rallied. The high of the day is around a measured move up based upon the height of this sell off. A lot of times, a high will be a measured move up from the low of the day to the open of the day. If it goes above that measured move target, which would be about here, I then look at a measured move target based upon the low and the high. And the market went a little bit above it. The reason why that's a measured move target is theoretically, when the market gets back to the high, the bears want to form a double top and then break below the neckline and fall for a measured move down. If instead it breaks above this high, traders will assume that the double top failed. Here, there was no obvious attempt at a double top, but there was a theoretical double top and traders will look for a measured move up. Strong rally, relentlessly up, but the open of the day is in the middle third of the day and therefore a magnet. We have a triangle late and a bull trend and therefore a magnet, potential final bull flag. And we also have a big round number below where we are up here. So traders will look to sell a reversal down. Once the market sells off, traders conclude that we're into the final portion of the day. The beginning of the day was a rally. Middle of the day was a triangle. An attempt at trend resumption. And now the end of the day is here. If this rally lasted all day, I would have said the end of the day began here, but because it reversed, I would say the end of the day, the final third of the day began up here. If a trader does sell below that bear bar, it's reasonable to put a stop just above the high of that bear bar, looking for a swing down to support the apex of the triangle, the big round number, and maybe all the way down to the open of the day. The day closed back at the open, even though it was a bull trend for most of the day. The sell off late in the day, testing the open, made the day a doji bar on the daily chart, a close near the open, a tail on the bottom, and then a tail on the top. The tail on the top is from the close to the high of the day in this case. Is this a wedge? Is it one, two, three? Some computers would say that. Other computers would say maybe it's a parabolic wedge up and then a bear bar, leg one, and then up again and then a doji bar, leg two, and then up and a reversal. So a parabolic wedge and a potential final flag reversal, a decent sell signal bar. Reasonable to take that short. And you could even use a tight stop one tick above the high of that sell signal bar, hoping for a test back down to the open of the day. We're around to measure move up. We have a final flag and we have a magnet of the big round number all below. Some traders don't like to sell when the risk is small because they know small risk means low probability. They want higher probability and they wait until they see three or four bear bars, especially if one or two of the bear bars is closing on their lows, and then they sell the close. When the market closes, they either sell a second before the close or they sell the market and get filled on the open of the next bar. This is a higher probability sell. The stop is further away. The risk is greater, but that's always the trade off. Whenever you take a higher probability trade, the risk reward ratio is going to be worse. Usually if the stop is further away, that means the risk is usually greater. If a trader did sell here and the market rallied above his stop and then it reversed down a second time, he would sell again. Other traders are pretty confident that we're going to test back down because of all the magnets below, open of the day, triangle, big round number, and then we're at a measured move target. Rather than getting stopped out, they'll use a wider stop, maybe based upon some kind of a measured move up, and they'll scale in higher if it goes higher. For example, maybe a measured move up based upon this final leg of the rally. Here's the measured move and put a stop just above it. I want to talk a little bit about my 80% rule. If the market's in a trend, 80% of reversal attempts will fail. If it's in a trading range, 80% of break up attempts will fail. Markets resist change. They tend to continue to do what they've been doing. When the market's in a clear bull trend, most reversal attempts are going to fail. Once it's in a clear bear trend, you only want to sell because 80% of reversal attempts up will fail. And you should sell at least a small position as soon as you believe the market is always in short. If you think it's in a bear trend, to have that confidence, you have to be at least 60% certain. So whenever you say, oh, I think the market's probably going down. What you're saying is you're at least 60% certain that the market is going at least a little bit lower. When that's the case, you have to sell. And you only sell until there's some kind of reversal back up or a strong bull breakout. Strong sell off, but open of the day, middle third of the day. The bears are sold will take profits. And then bulls, once they see a good bull bar like this, they're going to wonder if the open of the day is going to be support that will lead to a rally. And now we have a microdouble bottom. Although I don't have it drawn in here. This is a bigger bear bar breaking below this tight channel. And therefore it's climactic and that increases the chances of a bounce. Two good bull bars closing near their highs. A lot of bulls will buy above the microdouble bottom, hoping that we get back up to the high of the day. Not likely after this many bear bars in a tight channel, but we'll probably bounce enough at least for a scalp. Some bulls will say, huh, this bull bar is a pullback and a bear trend, but we're at support. And this bigger bear bar, biggest bear bar in about 15 bars, a climax. This is a bad sell signal bar. Therefore, there'll be more buyers than sellers at the low of this bull bar. And they'll place a limit order to buy at that low and get filled right here. The bears have a strong sell off and then a rally to about 50% up. Moving average gap bars. You expect some attempt at trend resumption down. Bears expecting trend resumption down, but we're disappointed by the appearance of that trend resumption down. Bear bar, bad follow through, tail in the bottom, bar not big. Where are the consecutive big bear bars? Consecutive bear bars here, but small. Therefore, this looks like a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Trying to reverse up here. You can call it a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down, one pullback, two pullback, three. You can call it a micro double bottom. You can call it a big double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout, higher low. So, wedge higher low and a double bottom higher low with this low or with this low. And then a decent buy signal bar and a small double bottom. This is a reasonable buy. And once it starts to go up, traders are concluding that the middle of the day has ended and the market is trying to get a trend up at the end of the day. Testing the low of the day down here. More importantly, testing a higher low. And this therefore is a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal with a good double bottom and good bull bars. While probabilities are never 60% when you're buying a major trend reversal, this one is close to 50% that you'll get at least a test up to the top of the range. This is a good buy setup. If you want higher probability, you wait until you get three consecutive bull bars or until you get a breakout or a breakout and a follow through bar. Good bull bars closing at their highs at support this prior higher low. So, good buying pressure at the bottom of a developing range. The market's looking for the bottom of the range. Is it here or is it here? It looks like it might be here, forming a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. You can buy on a reversal up, hoping that the market gets back to the open of the day, which is at the high of the day, where you can wait for the breakout and then buy later. If you buy here, reasonable to put your stop below this low. In fact, you can even put your stop below this low since it's already a micro double bottom. A lot of times it'll come all the way down to this low and very often exactly to that low. Sometimes a little bit above, sometimes a little bit below. Here we're reversing up. Once you get a bull bar, two bull bars, it's not likely to fall back below here. It's okay to use a stop below that low or even below this low. Higher probability. We got a strong breakout. You can buy the breakout as it's forming. You can buy the close or buy the close of the follow through bar. Stop at least below here, probably down here. And that's always the trade off. You wait until you see the strong breakout. The probability is higher that we're going higher, but you have to pay for that with worse risk reward. Usually stop far away. I began by talking about how the middle of the day, the market likes to test support or resistance, and then the market will either reverse or continue. And that trend at the end of the day is the final third of the day. I also talked about my 80% rule that 80% of the time the market will continue to do what it's been doing. If it's in a trend, 80% of reversal attempts will fail. If it's in a trading range, 80% of breakout attempts will fail. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on trading in the middle of the day.