 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading in trading ranges. I want to begin by talking about my 80% rule, and that is that the market has inertia. 80% of the time when it's in a trend and it tries to reverse, the reversal will fail. And 80% of the time when the market's in a trading range and it tries to break out, the breakout will fail and reverse. There are characteristics that distinguish legs within a trend from legs within a trading range. And I want to talk about some of those characteristics. When the market's in a trading range, traders want to buy in the bottom half and sell in the top half. The market is in a trading range. There's a smaller range. The whole thing is a trading range by the end here. I talked about how markets have inertia, and that means they are resistant to change and they tend to continue what they've been doing. In a trading range, 80% of the time the market will have breakout attempts that are strong, up and down, and they'll fail and lead to reversals instead of a successful breakout into a trend. We have a strong reversal down, but it stops after a bar or two. Pretty strong reversal up. It stops after two or three bars. Three consecutive bear bars, the market reverses up. The lack of consecutive strong trend bars. Here, a lack of consecutive strong bull bars. Here, a lack of consecutive strong bear bars. Here, we have a couple bear bars, but a tail. And then we have a doji bar and then a bear bar, and then a bull bar. We have a couple bear bars and then a bull bar. That lack of consecutive strong bear bars is much more common when the market is in a bear leg in a trading range or in a bull leg in a trading range. The bulls have a good bar here, but a doji here, a bull bar here, a doji here, a good bull bar here, but then a follow through bar with a tail on top. And then we have a micro double top here at a prior high. Whenever there is a good friend bar, the follow through tends to be bad. Big bull bar and then a doji bar. Big bull bar, a doji bar. Big bull bar, a bear doji. A pair of bear bars and then a tail below and a doji bar here. Big bull bar, a doji bar. That is a sign that the market is probably in a leg in a trading range and not in a trend. When the market's rallying, I pay a lot of attention to whether or not the bears can make money. And if the bears can make money selling at a prior high or selling at a prior high and scaling in, then the market is probably in a bull leg in what will become a trading range and not a bull leg that is becoming a bull trend. Here, if the bears sold above this high one bull flag, we have a rally, a pullback. If the bears can make money selling breakouts of bull flags, high one and high two bull flags, that's a problem. That's a sign that the bulls are not all that strong. The bears who sold at the high of this bear bar, a high one bull flag, made money. And that should not happen or should not happen often if this is the start of a bull trend. The bulls have a double bottom and they're trying to reverse up. Is this going to be the start of a bull trend or is this going to be a bull leg in a trading range? The rally can last two or three hours, 30, 40, 50 bars. However, it's still more likely going to be a leg in what will become a trading range and not the start of a bull trend. Can bears sell at a prior high and make money? And here they could. They sell at that high and the market fell far enough for them to make a profit. They sell at this high. Can they sell at this high? Can they sell at a reversal down from a prior high and make money? And yes, they could. These bears made money. They got out here. And the same thing here. Bears selling at this high. Bears selling on the reversal down. The market fell far enough for the bears to make money. Bears selling at this high using a wide stop and scaling in. They made money as well. They sell more higher. They can sell more either at a fixed number of points above. They can sell more above a bad bull flag above the spare bar. Or they can sell on a reversal down. Many different ways to scale in higher. Then they get out at their first entry price. Break even on their first entry. And then with a profit on their higher entry. Same thing here. Sell at that high. Scale in higher. And the market fell back to their original entry price. And they can make money. Obviously, if they sell and the market immediately goes down, there's no need to scale in higher. But sometimes they sell and the market goes up higher. But because the bears have been making money selling above bars repeatedly through here, the bears are confident that they'll make money selling at this high as well if they use a wide stop and scale in higher. And because the market fell back below the breakout point, as it did for all of these breakouts, it kept pulling back below the breakout point. That is a stairs type pattern. And that's more common in a bull trend that will soon evolve into a trading range. The opposite is true of a bear trend. If the bulls can make money repeatedly buying below bars, scaling in, buying reversals up, then the leg down is probably a leg in a trading range and not the start of a bear trend. For example, if bulls place a limit order to buy at this low, betting against a successful breakout, and they can make money buying there, then that makes it less likely that this is going to lead to a big bear trend. Here, they bought that low. It rallied a point. They could exit with a one-point profit. And same thing there. They buy at the new low. Here, they had to scale in lower and went back to their original entry price. They could get out with a one-point profit on their second entry and get out break-even on their first entry. They bought here and then they get out there break-even. Let's say a bull bought below this bar. For the bears, it's a bear channel, a bear trend, and it's a low one bear flag, but it's a bull body and it's after a bull bar here. It's probably not a very good low one bear flag, and therefore some bulls would buy with the limit order at the low of that bull bar, and then they'll scalp out. Again, bulls making money in a bear trend, the bear trend is probably a bear leg in what will end up as a trading range. Also, buying a reversal up. We broke below this low, we broke below that low, and we're getting a reversal and a second reversal up, and the bulls made money buying above that reversal bar. In trading ranges, a lot of the probabilities gravitate toward 50%. Setups that would normally be high probability in a trend, like a 60% setup, are closer to 50% in their trading range. And setups that are typically low probability in a trend, like a 40% setup, are also closer to 50%. When lower probability outcomes happen more than what you'd expect, then you have to assume the market's probably in a trading range. The first reversal down after a strong breakout to a new high, probably buyers below the low of the bar. I'm not going to be buying at the low of a strong bear bar after a breakout, because too often it's a trap. However, the odds are there are buyers below, and bulls buying at that low can scale in lower. When you see a strong breakout like this, you know several things. You know the market's probably not in a bear trend, but it's either in a bull trend, and it will go up without much of a pullback, or it's a bull leg in what will become a trading range. In which case, if you're buying up here, you need to stop down here or down here, because if it's a bull leg in a trading range, you can get a very deep pullback. You can get a bear leg in a trading range, and it could even go below the bottom of the range. Strong rally, 60% chance there'll be a second leg up, and bulls will buy the reversal down. However, it's a possible second leg trap. One leg up, a wedge rally, and then a pullback, and then a second leg up that's especially strong. It's still a 60% chance that it's going to have a second leg up, but if it does have a deep pullback, in other words, if the 40% happens, then you have to be thinking that maybe this is a rally that is part of a trading range and not the start of a big bull trend. Okay. Strong reversal down, a pair of bear bars, and then a deep pullback. Therefore, this rally is more likely a bull leg in what will become a trading range instead of the start of a bull trend. Whenever something is a high probability setup in a trend, and you see that pattern setting up in what you think is a trading range, the probability is not as high as you think. It's probably more like 50% instead of 60%. Head and shoulders top, left shoulder, head, and then right shoulder. And there's also a double top bear flag. You would think 60% chance we would test below, the neckline of the head and shoulders top, but because so much of the trading is sideways, trading range, the probabilities are rarely ever 60%. So it's closer to 50-50. We've got a pretty strong reversal up after the sell-off, a sign that instead of a continued bear trend, lower highs and lower lows, this is probably a bear leg in a trading range. And then this is probably the start of a bull leg in that same trading range. I said that when the market's in a trading range and you have a rally or a sell-off, you get pullbacks beyond breakout points. In other words, a stairs type of pattern. That means most gaps close. Here we have a gap between the close of this bar and the high of the prior bar. But if it's a bull trend, higher probability the gap will stay open. The next bar, the low fell below the high of the breakout point and the gap closed. That is more common if the rally is going to be a bull leg in a trading range. You can see the pullback. The following bar had a low below the high of the breakout point. Strong breakout above a prior high and the market immediately pulled back below the high and the pullback here went far below the breakout point. The gap closed. These pullbacks allow bears to get out without a loss. So bears selling at this high, they could be disappointed by the size of this bull bar and decide they want to get out break even. The next bar fell below the breakout point and allowed the bears to get out break even. And the same right here. The bears who sold at this high, the pullback was deep enough for them to make a profit. If the bears can sell and avoid a loss like this or make a profit like this, then the rally probably is going to be a bull leg in what will end up as a trading range. And the opposite is true for the bears. We have a gap between this close and that low. Then we had a reversal back up above the breakout point. And therefore, the bulls who bought that low right here, if they did not scale in, this rally back above their entry price allowed them to get out without a loss. If they did scale in, the rally allowed them to make a profit. We have a gap here, right here. This close and that low and a bigger breakout here, this close and that low. And look at the pullback. The pullback went above the top of the bear swing. So bear gaps are also closing, just like the bull gaps are closing. And that's one of the characteristics of a trading range. I want to talk a little bit about legs within a trading range instead of in a trend. Pretty good rally. A very tight channel, a bull breakout. But look to the left. We're barely above the top of the trend. We're in a broad bull channel at this point. We have higher highs and higher lows. But it's either a bull leg in a broad bull channel or a bull leg in a trading range. Look at the lack of consecutive big bull bars closing on their highs. The bull bars that do close on their highs are not big. And we do not have consecutive big bull bars. That is a characteristic of a rally that will end up in a trading range. In other words, it'll lead to a bear leg and not to a bull trend. We get all of these tails on the tops of the bars and the pullbacks because the bulls are taking partial profits. When the market goes up a little, they take profits. They lack confidence that the trend will continue up very far. So they keep taking profits. The bears do not want to sell too low. They see the markets probably in a trading range, maybe a broad bull channel. They want to sell high. They want to sell above prior highs. And very often, they don't want to sell too low below the prior high. That lack of selling by the bears can lead to a pretty strong reversal up. They want to sell high. They don't want to sell low. So why is the market rallying? It's rallying because there are not many sellers down here. So there are a lack of sellers. The market has to go higher to find a price where bears are willing to sell. This is, I think, important to distinguish from what I was just showing. We have a lack of consecutive big bull bars. We have decent bull bar, but not consecutive big bull bars. Terrible follow through. The same here. Terrible follow through. Terrible follow through. But what's different between this rally and all the rallies that I've shown so far today? This. Gaps. Whenever a rally looks weak and it looks like a bull leg in a trading range, but it's forming gaps and negative gaps, slight overlap. We have a breakout and a pullback. Could not fall below this breakout point. We have a breakout. Does not look all that strong, but look at the pullback. Here, here, here. Could not fall below the breakout point. If you have a rally that looks weak, but it's forming two or three gaps, it's probably a small pullback bull trend. And it probably is a bull trend and not a bull leg in a trading range. These gaps often lead to measured moves up. If the market's forming gaps or negative gaps, just a little bit of an overlap, do not sell at prior highs and scale in higher because you will lose money. For example, if you sold this high and scaled in higher, it never came back below the breakout point and you would have had to cover buyback your short with a loss. You would lose money. It's a small pullback bull trend, not a bull leg in a trading range. Here, gap. And it did lead to a measured move up. And you can see some profit taking at the measured move up. Aggressive bears might sell there for scalp. Most of the selling is due to bulls taking profits. We have a sell-off. We have a couple of bear bars. Why does this look weak? Why does it look like a bear leg in a trading range? Well, the bears are lacking conviction. We keep getting pauses after big bear bars because every time the bears see a big bear bar, they see it as a gift, a surprisingly big bar, allowing them to buy back their shorts for profit. They're taking quick profits. So we keep getting reversals after big bear bars instead of a series of consecutive big bear bars. The bears lack conviction. They do not believe the market is going down very far. They're not selling at lows. They're waiting to sell pullbacks. They're buying back their shorts, every strong bear bar, betting that the market will pull back. The bulls see that as well, but they don't want to be buying high. They suspect it's a trading range and they prefer to buy low. These little reversals are more due to bears taking profits and then selling again than from bulls buying because they're not willing to buy too high up in a weak rally or at the top of a trading range. The bulls want to buy low and the market's falling because of a lack of buyers, not because of enthusiastic sellers. The bears keep buying back their shorts every time there's a strong bear bar. We have a bear bar, bad follow-through. Bear bar is not all that big. Bad follow-through, bad follow-through, lots of reversals up, but a small pullback bear trend. We're getting gaps and that increases the chances that this is a bear trend and not just a bear leg in what will become a trading range. It's a very strong type of bear trend. Even though it looks weak, traders should not be buying. A pullback not overlapping the breakout point. A pullback not overlapping a breakout point. Small pullback bear trend. That is a bear trend. It turns out we got a reversal and you can call the whole thing a trading range. But when you see a sell-off that does not look strong yet it's forming gaps, it's probably a small pullback bear trend and therefore it's probably going lower, a lot lower. Do not look to buy. We have a gap. We fell below a measured move from here to this potential measured move. We did fall to a measured move based upon this gap. It became a measuring gap. So when you're seeing a small pullback bear trend and you're getting gaps, you have to be thinking that one or more of those gaps will lead to a measured move down. I talked about the characteristics of a trading range leg versus a trend leg. All the signs that the market's in the trading range are due to how traders are trading. The traders believe the sell-offs will not get too far and therefore they don't want to sell near the bottom. And the bulls believe the sell-offs and bear breakouts will fail and they're looking to buy low, betting on a reversal up. And then the opposite is true when the market gets up near prior highs. The bears are much more interested in selling rallies, but they're not willing to hold their shorts for very long because they're not confident the reversals down will get very far. And the bulls are not willing to buy high. They're looking to sell rallies to take profits on the lungs that they bought lower. Bulls are buying low, selling high. Bears are selling high and buying low. So both bulls and bears are buying low, selling high. And both are taking quick profits. And the result is a trading range. And that is why when the market's in a trading range, traders should look to buy low, sell high and scalp, take quick profits. The bulls actually are buying bear reversals, betting that the reversals will fail. So a strong bear bar, a lot of bulls will buy that if they think this is a trading range. And they'll also buy a reversal up. And when the market's near the top, bears will do the opposite every time they see a strong bull bar, they'll sell it and they'll sell a reversal down. A bull breakout, bears will sell and they'll take profits, take quick profits on the way down. Neither the bulls nor the bears believe that the market's going to go very far up or down. And the result is they take quick profits. Sometimes they can swing trade, but in general, they're not expecting a big trend up or down and they're looking to take quick profits. When the market's in a trading range, traders should look to buy low, buy in the bottom half and sell high, sell in the top half. At this point, the market's in a trading range right here. And this is the top half. Bears are going to sell in the top half and bulls are going to sell out of their lungs to take profits. And in the bottom half, the opposite is true. The bears are going to buy back their shorts and the bulls are going to buy to get long. As more bars get added, the trading range can expand and you get a new top half and a new bottom half. And traders will do the same as they did earlier. And same here. At this point, the trading range high is up here, the low is down here, and bears will look to sell in the top half and bulls will look to buy in the bottom half. Because both bulls and bears are buying low, selling high, and taking quick profits, the market continues sideways. The market will create a trading range when traders trade that way. As a trader, if you see evidence of a trading range, you should do exactly what the institutions are doing, and that's buy low, sell high, and scalp. Here's my acronym, BLSHS. Trading ranges often have very deep pullbacks, and therefore, a lot of traders prefer to buy in the bottom third and sell in the top third and do nothing in the middle third. At this point, we have a trading range. It looks like a bull leg in a trading range. Traders want to sell in the top third and buy in the bottom third, either with limit orders or reversals up. At this point, the trading range is bigger. Traders want to sell in the top third, buy in the bottom third. A bigger trading range. Whenever the market's in the bottom third, they're looking to buy, either with a limit order on a reversal up, and when it's in the top third, they're looking for reasons to sell, like a reversal down, especially a reversal down above a prior high. In general, stops can be very far away because a lot of traders will use wide stops and scale in, and the result is the risk is big, so the risk-reward ratio is not all that good. You're taking quick profits, so the reward is not all that big. Because most breakouts fail, the probability is low when buying near the top and selling near the bottom. If you're buying up here betting on a breakout, you're probably going to lose. The probability is the breakout will fail, and the opposite's true. Selling it in the lower third, betting on a breakout and the conversion into a bear trend, a low probability bet. Therefore, if you're looking to buy at the top, your stop is far away, the risk is big, probably not much reward, and the probability is low. That's a bad trader's equation for traders looking to buy high, and the opposite is true for traders looking to sell low. If you're selling down here, your stop is up here, your risk is big, your reward is probably not great because we're in a trading range. It's probably not going to fall all that far. So you have bad risk reward, and you have low probability because most breakout attempts fail. And this attempt to convert into a bear trend probably will fail. So it's better to look to buy low and sell high. A stop entry is a bet on a breakout and a trend. When the market's in a tight trading range, instead of buying with stops at the top, betting on a trend, it's better to sell with a limit order at the top, betting on a continued tight trading range. Instead of selling with a stop at the bottom, betting on the conversion into a trend, it's better to be buying with a limit order, betting on a failed breakout and a reversal back up into the tight trading range. When the range is very tight, most traders should not trade. It's a limit order market, easier to make money selling above bars and buying below, betting that breakouts will fail. A limit order is basically the opposite of a stop order. A stop order is betting that a trend is beginning. A limit order is betting that there will be a reversal instead of a trend. Better to be looking to buy below and sell above and not the opposite. Very often, you'll get very big signal bars inside of trading ranges. They look strong, but if you look to the left, you see the market's in a trading range, so the context is bad. So, for example, here we have a very big bear bar. Do you really want to be selling below that big bear bar? No. It's a big bar, so the risk is big. At a minimum, the stop is above the bar, maybe all the way up here, and it's forcing you to sell at the bottom of a trading range. So the reward is small and the probability is bad. Probably more buyers than sellers below that big bear bar. And the opposite is true here with this big bull bar. The bar is big, so the stop is far, the risk is great. There's not much reward because it'll probably remain in a trading range, and the probability is not good buying in the top half. And therefore, more likely sellers above and better to make money selling with limit orders above. I began by talking about my 80% rule, and that is that 80% of breakout attempts in a trading range fail. Traders should look for reversals instead of breakouts. Next, I talked about characteristics of legs within a trading range in contrast to those within a trend. And finally, when the market's in a trading range, traders should look to buy in the bottom half and sell in the top half and take quick profits. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading in trading ranges. 2021. To ETF Fish theee and to ETF Fish