 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of six videos on trading ranges. I'll begin by talking about how trading ranges lead to either trend resumption or trend reversal. And next I'll talk about legs. Are they the start of a trend or are they simply a leg within a trading range? Every trading range always contains at least one buy setup and one sell setup. In general, I don't use the term trading range unless a pullback has 20 or more bars. If a pullback in a trend lasts only 5 or 10 bars, chances are the trend will resume. Once the pullback grows to 20, 30, or 40 bars, the probability of trend resumption drops to about 50%, and the probability of trend reversal increases to about 50%. Every trading range such as this has both a trend reversal pattern and a trend resumption pattern. For example, the bulls can argue that the market's getting higher lows and therefore it is a broad bull channel. The bears in this particular case could argue lower highs. So a bear channel, the early stages of a bear channel or a head and shoulders top, left shoulder, head or right shoulder. So a bear trend is a bear trend. And you can call it a higher high major trend reversal, a wedge, 1, 2, 3. You can call this a lower high major trend reversal. Here's a bear trend and then a trading range. If the bear trend resumes down, then the day will become a bear trend day, opening on the high, closing on the low. On the other hand, if it reverses up and gets back to near the open of the day, the day will be simply a trading range day. Bear breakout of a triangle. Not great follow through, but we still got a second leg down. That is trend resumption. So a bear trend, a trading range. And now the bear trend is resuming down, continuing down. Bull trend channel evolved into a trading range. And now you could argue that we have a wedge bull flag, three pushes down, one, two or three. And we're trying to get a bull breakout, but so far not very good. If the market resumes up, then the day will end up as a trend day, a bull trend day, opening on the low, closing on its high. On the other hand, if the bears get a higher high, major trend reversal and bear breakout, the day becomes a trading range day, closing down near the open. In this particular case, we got a bear breakout and another bear breakout, and we closed near the open and the day became a trend reversal day. Or you can simply say a trading range day. If this is a five minute chart on the daily chart, this would be a doji close near the open. And it would be a trading range day. Once the market has a pullback that grows to 20 or more bars, the chance of trend resumption equals the chance of trend reversal. And I call that breakout mode. If there's a trend reversal, it's usually a major trend reversal, like a higher low major trend reversal. If it's trend resumption, it could be a double top or in this particular case, maybe a wedge bear flag, three pushes up, one, two, three. It does not matter that the first push up of the wedge began before the final push down of the bear trend. That is very common. The bulls see this as a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal, or simply a higher low, major trend reversal. And the bear see it as a wedge bear flag, bear trend, a pullback to about 50%, three pushes up, one, two. Some computers see it as basically a big low, two short, like one pullback, leg two. A bull trend and then a trading range that began probably over here. You could argue that it began here. In any case, it's more than 20 bars and therefore the market is in breakout mode. And you have to assume that there is both a reasonable sell. Here we have a double top, lower high, major trend reversal, and a reasonable buy. You can call it a double bottom bull flag or a triangle. And then a bull breakout and a pullback from that breakout. The probability of a resumption of the trend up is about the same as the probability of a reversal down. And that's always the case in a trading range. There's always a good bull setup and there's always a good bear setup. In this particular case, this little bull breakout had a pullback followed by a trend resumption up. Bull trend. Where did the pullback begin? Did it begin here or here or here or here? Doesn't matter. In any case, it went more than 20 bars. And when you have a pullback that grows to 20 or more bars, I start calling it a trading range. And when that's the case, the probability that the bull trend will resume up falls to about the same as the probability of the bear trend reversing down. The bears see this as a small double top lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend. Bear breakout. Double top lower high. The bull see it as either a triangle bull flag or a double bottom bull flag. Both are reasonable. Here we got trend reversal down. Bear trend and a pullback, a sideways pullback. Once it grows to 20 or more bars, the probability of a trend reversal up becomes almost as high as the probability of a trend resumption down. I say almost, it's basically 50-50. Maybe it's 51% chance of a bear trend. Maybe 49% chance of a bull trend. In any case, there's always a good reasonable buy setup and a good reasonable sell setup once a pullback grows to 20 or more bars. For the bulls, a higher low major trend reversal or a triangle bottom. And for the bears, a double top bear flag or a triangle bear flag. And here we got a bull breakout. Up here, it still could be another sell setup. Two legs up, one pullback, two. It could be a large low two bear flag. And in fact, that's what it turned out to be. The bears got trend resumption down. Not a big bear trend, but they still got trend resumption down for about 30 or 40 bars. Bear trend. The pullback began here. It grew here. We tried to get a low two short, like one pullback leg two. Decent sell signal bar. But instead of down, the pullback continued to add bars. And after about 20 bars, the probability that you'll get a trend reversal up becomes just about as high as the probability that you'll get trend resumption down. What type of bottom is it? It doesn't matter what you call it. You can call it a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal here. You can call it a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal there. You can call this a low two short. Leg one, pullback leg two. You can call it a triangle. You can call it a rounded bottom. You can say there's accumulation going on. It doesn't matter what you call it. Once you have about 20 bars or more in a pullback, it's a trading range and the market's in breakout mode. And the probability is 50-50 that the market will go up or down. Whenever it's in breakout mode, the first breakout up or down only has a 50% chance of success. But once there is a successful breakout, the probability that the successful breakout is up is about the same as the probability that it would be down. Here we got a bull breakout, a pullback, and then a series of bull trend bars. If this is a bear flag, we got a bull breakout of the bear flag, and then we got a sustained bull breakout with five consecutive bull bars. A buy the close bull trend, probably going higher. A bull trend and a deep pullback. Does the trading range continue all the way to here, or is this the end of the pullback? Some computers would conclude that it already has trend resumption up. Bull trend, pullback, wedge bull flag, one, two, three. Does not matter that two is above one. It's a double bottom and a bear breakout. That's a type of a wedge bull flag. And now we're getting trend resumption up. A bull breakout followed by a deep pullback. And the bull channel has a wedge shape. You can call it a broad bull channel. You can call it a broad wedge bull channel. In any case, it's still a bull channel, a bull trend. Two-sided trading. Whenever you have a broad bull channel, you always have deep swings down. And at times the market can even become always in short when you have a broad channel. Because of the strong selling here, here, and here, and the bears are able to make money not only with limit orders, but with stop orders selling below bars, the channel is probably soon going to transition into a trading range. Remember the market cycle. You got a very strong breakout, a bull trend, and then a pullback, and then a channel. And the channel usually evolves into a trading range. A channel is usually the first leg of what will become a trading range. Even though it's still part of the bull trend, it usually ends up part of a trading range. As it did here. Bull trend, bull breakout, deep pullback, and now a channel. And the channel, 75% of the time, will have a bear breakout below the bottom of the channel. And the channel will evolve into a trading range. Bull channel, bear flag. 75% chance you get a bear breakout. And the breakout can be by going sideways or by going down. Usually test a major higher low. For example, this is a major higher low. A strong rally to a new high. This is another major higher low. It usually comes down to test major higher lows. This is not so major because the breakout is not so strong. But here or here, reasonable targets for the bottom of the trading range. This might be the bottom. It might continue further down to here. And then have a leg up. So leg up, leg down, maybe a leg up afterwards. Bear channel. 75% chance you're going to have a bull breakout. Whenever you see a bear channel, you should think of it as a bull flag. And the target is usually the top of the channel. This is not really a strong bear breakout. But a deep pullback. This is probably the start of the channel phase. Usually when you get a reversal up above the top of the channel, the first target is the start of the bear channel, which is this high. And then an evolution into a trading range. This first rally, probably the start of a trading range, even though at the time, you don't know that. And this bear channel is probably part of the trading range. Even though at the time, it's also still part of the bear trend. Bear trend. Bull breakout. Bear trend. Bull breakout. Fairly tight bear channel. Whenever you have a fairly tight bear channel, and then you have a bull breakout, chances are the reversal up is minor. A minor reversal usually leads to either a trading range or a resumption of the bear trend. On a higher timeframe chart, a very tight channel like this is a breakout. So if you get a pullback, it's like a bull breakout above a micro channel. And on a higher timeframe chart, the odds are traders will sell the first breakout to the upside. We have a gap this low, that high. We have another surprisingly big gap right here. This close below that low. And this pullback below that low. You have to be thinking that maybe this is a measuring gap. And maybe the bulls will not buy until it gets down to a round of measured move. Maybe the bears will not take profits until it gets down to around a measured move. And now we have a double top bear flag also testing that low. And you can see, once the market got down to about a measured move, the buyers came in. The bears bought back their shorts, and the bulls bought. Bear breakout. Good follow through. Another bear bar. Measuring gap more likely than an exhaustion gap. I'm now going to talk about whether a move is the start of a trend or a leg in a trading range. Clearly a bear trend. However, this is not the best follow through. It's not a bull bar, so it's not terrible follow through. But it's also not a bear bar. The biggest bear bar, 15 or 20 bars into a bear trend. And then this kind of follow through. You have to be wondering, is this a bear leg in a trading range? Bear bar here, doji here. Bear bar here, bull bar here. Bear bar here, not big. Doji bar. Bear bar, bull bar. A pair of bear bars, but then a doji bar. The bear bars are getting bad follow through. So you have to be suspicious that maybe this is more likely a bear leg in what will end up as a trading range instead of a bear trend that continues on for a long way. The bulls are buying the bear closes, betting against a strong bear trend. And the bears are taking quick profits. They're selling maybe above bars, maybe at that high. And as soon as they get enough for a scalp, they buy. And the bears are buying, creating a bar like that. So the bears are not confident of lower prices. Once they get a strong bear bar, they use it to take profits instead of saying, oh, it's a sell the close bear trend. I better sell because it's going lower. The bears are not confident. Bad follow through. Consecutive sell climaxes. Big bear bar. Sell climax. Sell climax. Sell climax. Sell climax. Sell climax. You have to be thinking that this is probably an exhaustive end of a move and the conversion into a trading range rather than the start of a new leg down. We have a gap this high, that low. Is this bar more likely a measuring gap leading to a measured move down? Or is this telling us that this entire sell off is probably a bear leg in a trading range? If it's a trading range, you have to assume that the market will go above resistance and obvious resistance is this low. Probably an exhaustion gap. The biggest bear bar, 20 bars into a bear trend. The bear trend, not all that strong. More likely a bear leg in what would become a trading range. Traders expect a bull breakout and then our trading range. The bears are scalping and they're taking quick profits. And the bulls are looking for opposite trades. You can see the reversal. And then once we have a big reversal, we have big down, big up, big confusion. You have to assume the market's going to go sideways. And once it is sideways, bears will look to sell second entry shorts. First entry, second entry. Bulls will look to buy second entry buys in the bottom half. First entry, second entry. And they'll scalp. They'll take quick profits because they doubt the moves will go very far. Once traders start to believe that the downside is limited, they'll begin to trade it like a trading range. Even if it's still in a broad bear channel. We're still getting lower highs and lower lows, even though this low is above that low. So it's still a bear channel. But the reversals up are big enough for bulls to make money buying. Whenever the market's in a broad bear channel, traders usually trade it like a trading range. They buy low, sell high, and scalp because a broad bear channel like this also is a trading range for much of the time. Traders often use wide stops because they're not confident that the first reversal up will be the final reversal up. Traders also tend to use wide stops and they're willing to scale in. For example, if a trader buys here, he might not put a stop here. He might look at this and say, well, trading range, yes, but strong enough bear breakout might get one more leg down. So maybe I'll put my stop, a measured move down somewhere down here, and then look to buy if we get a second reversal up. So he buys here and then he buys more there or more here. Traders are never really certain where the top and bottom of the range will be, but they are very confident that it will not be too far. So they're willing to use wide stops and scale in. And because they don't think the market will go very far up or down, they take quick profits. They scalp. Strong bear close. Bulls will buy it, betting on an exhaustion gap. A reversal down, strong bear close in the bottom third of a developing trading range. Bulls will buy it, betting that the bear breakout will fail. Bulls will buy that bear close. They'll buy this low, betting the bear breakout will fail, and they'll add on lower. And bears sell rallies. They see a strong bull bar, and they'll bet against this being a measuring gap. They'll bet that it'll trade back down, maybe down here. Double top bear flag. And they'll expect this gap to close. You can see this low fell below that high. They'll sell more on the reversal down. A weak bull flag. Only a doji. This bull bar has bad follow through. It has a tail. It's a lower high. A bad bear flag. Traders will sell at a limit order at that high. Even here, a strong bull bar closing on its high, but near the top of a developing trading range. Some bears will sell at that high and get filled there. Others will sell this micro double top. First attempt down, second attempt down, especially because it's also a double top with this. Again, a weak bull flag, the top of a tight trading range, near the top of a big trading range. Traders will sell above that bull bar, or they'll sell below this bear bar, or below that bear bar. Betting that the bull breakout attempt will fail. When the market gets to a new low, instead of bears selling more, they take profits. They buy back their shorts on strong bear closes and on new lows. New low, bears will take profits. Strong bear close on the low, bears will take profits. Betting against a continued trend down. And bulls will do the opposite. They know the bears are taking profits, and they know the probability that this will become a strong bear trend is low. Remember my 80% rule. 80% of the time, if you have a trading range, and you have an attempt at a strong bull breakout, or a strong bear breakout, it will fail and reverse. Strong bull breakout. And then a high two bull flag. High one, and then high two. Consecutive bull bars. The body's getting bigger. Closing on their high or near their high. No pullback in five bars. One, and then three, and then one more here. So that's five bars. Five bar bull micro channel. Even with this bear bar, probably buyers below for at least a little bit more up. Maybe here, maybe here. Higher price is likely, so better to only look to buy. Probably with a strong bull breakout like this, we'll get some kind of measured move up. Maybe based upon the breakout. Maybe the open of the first bar, close of the final bar, measured move up here. Strong bull breakout. Pullback. Probably a channel, and then a trading range. Spike and channel bull trend. Bull breakout. So a spike up. A pullback. And then the channel. A lot of little reversals along the way. So it's a channel. And usually a spike in channel bull trend has a bear breakout, and then it evolves into a trading range. Not a lot of consecutive big bull trend bars, especially later in the trend. We have a pair here, but then you start getting bear bars after bull bars. Bull bar, small follow through, then a couple of bear bars. Bull bar, doji. Bull bar, but big tail on top. This is looking like a bull leg in what would become a trading range. Many pullbacks, minor reversals, tails on the tops of bars. Lots of overlaps, small, tight trading ranges. This does not look like the start of a big bull trend. It looks like a bull trend that will soon evolve into a trading range. And it did. Bull channel, bear flag, 75% chance you'll get a bear breakout. Spike pullback channel probably will evolve into a trading range. Market cycle. Strong bull breakout, bull channel, and then trading range. And then the market decides whether to resume up or reverse down. I said that a lot of times when you have a bull breakout like that, one of the first things I look for is a measured move up based upon the bodies of the bull bars. So the open of the first bar, maybe the low of the first bar, and the close of the final bar of the breakout. You can also get a leg one, leg two measured move. Leg one, pull back, maybe leg two. Whenever you have a bull breakout and a pullback and then a channel, you have to be thinking about possibly three pushes up. One, two, three, and then a trading range. On the other hand, here, a breakout with follow through. And then look at this bar. The low of this bar is around the high of that bar. I can't tell if they overlap, but in any case, it's a gap or a negative gap. And therefore, it might result in a measured move up. And this bar could become a measuring gap. And maybe we get a bigger three pushes up. One, two, three. Maybe a nested one, two, three, one, two, three. Measured move up based upon the open of the first bar. Close of the final bar of the breakout. You can see some profit taking at that level. Leg one, leg two. Leg one, the bull breakout. And then the bottom of the pullback, leg two. Profit taking at that level. The bull's taking profits. Aggressive bears might sell there as well. But when the pullbacks are this small, one or two bars and not very far down, it's usually better only to buy, not sell. We tried to get a wedge top. One, two, three. Got a bull breakout above the wedge top. A pullback. Looks like a perfect breakout test of that high. And then a measured move up. We got to that measured move target. Look what happened. Profit taking. Maybe some bears selling, at least for a scalp. In a bull channel, especially a tight bull channel with very small pullbacks, it's better to only look to buy. And bulls can swing or scalp. A good buy, buy the blow of that bear bar, betting that the bear reversal will fail. Another two bars up. Even though a decent bear bar, more likely a pullback from the breakout above this high. Consecutive bull bars closing on their highs. Probably buyers below. A breakout above potentially a wedge top. Probably will get at least a small second leg up. Bulls will buy that close or that close. A high one buy. A pullback after the breakout. Perfect breakout test. This low pulled back and tested that breakout point. Buy on the resumption up. And bulls, as I said, will buy for either a swing or for a scalp. Bears see this as well. A spike in channel. And they know it's probably going to have a bear swing and then form a trading range. So at some point, bears begin to look to sell. And when they sell, they're not selling initially with stops. The channel is too tight. The pullbacks are too small. However, they will start to sell with limit orders at a prior high. For example, sell here. And then they'll place a limit order to sell at this high and get filled there. And they'll use wide stops. And many of them are willing to scale in higher. They'll also sell strong bull closes here and here. Although I don't have it indicated here. Betting that the bull breakouts will get pullbacks. Initially, the bears are only looking for scalps. The market's still always in long and a fairly tight channel. But they'll sell, use wide stops and scale in higher. Betting that the bull channel will soon evolve into a trading range. Three consecutive bear bars. Look back here. When's the last time you've seen three consecutive bear bars? You haven't. And three pushes up. One, two, three. Around measured move targets over here. A lot of bears will now start betting that these bull flags will fail. And that this is probably near the top of a trading range. So, when they see three bear bars, they'll place a limit order to sell at the high of the bar. And they'll get filled here. Again, they probably have to use a fairly wide stop. Initially, they sell at prior highs. And then at some point, once they start to see consecutive bear bars, here are three bear bars, they'll start selling above the high of the bear bar. Betting that we will not even get to a new high. That we'll get at least a small second leg down. As the sell-off gets stronger, bears become more aggressive. Here's a bear bar and a follow-through bar. They might sell back close. They might sell below this inside bar. We're trying to reverse up, but a small reversal and a lower high. They'll sell below that bar, betting that the bear swing will continue down. Two small legs up, one pull back, two. They'll sell below that bear bar. It's becoming a bear trend. Are we still always in long? You could argue that we're always in short here because we're probably going a little bit lower. But once you start to get four or five consecutive bear bars, we're probably always in short. And we're probably going at least somewhat lower. This low stayed above that low, above the bottom of the channel. If you're looking for very few reversals, you can argue that this is simply a pullback from this bull trend. A 50% pullback and therefore still always in long. And that's true on a higher timeframe chart. But on this chart, I think it probably became always in short here. So if you're trading this chart, I think it's okay to sell, betting that we're going down at least a little further. Three buy signal bars, one, two, three. Two of them triggered. This is a good place to get out of shorts and bulls will start looking to buy here. Around a 50% pullback. Betting on a bull leg in the developing trading range. Strong bear breakout. Terrible follow through for the bears. Nine bar bull micro channel. Nine bars without a pullback. This low did not fall below that low. And none of these lows fell below the low of the prior bar until this bar. This bar fell below that low. But a nine bar bull micro channel and a reversal up. Probably buyers below and higher prices. On a higher timeframe chart, this is a breakout, a spike. This is also a spike. Pullback and then channel. Is this spike and channel the start of a strong bull trend? Or is it simply a big leg in a developing trading range? We got a breakout here. We tried to top out here. We tried to get a double top lower high. Instead, we got a bull breakout and the gap stayed open. The pullback here stayed above that low. Maybe this will lead to a measured move up. In any case, this breakout and the context are good enough to make the traders believe we're going at least a little bit higher. I'm always looking at context. And by context, I mean the bars to the left. Is the market already in a big trading range? Is the trend getting closer to support or resistance? Does this look like a strong bull trend? Are there consecutive big bull trend bars closing on their highs? Or do bull bars have tails on top? Do bull bars lead to bear bars? Are there a lot of small dojis? If that's the case, then even though it's still in a bull trend, it probably is soon going to evolve into a trading range. Is it stalling near a prior high? Here. And then again here. If so, that increases the chances that the entire trend is probably a bull leg in what will become a trading range. Disappointing rally. We've been rallying for 20 or 30 bars, not making much progress, and now we're getting a fairly deep pullback. No consecutive big bull trend bars. Every bar or two, there's a pullback. A lot of bear bars on the way up. Pullback here is fairly deep in this channel. This is all trading range price action, and it makes it likely that this bull channel will end up part of a trading range. And it was part of a trading range for the next 30 bars or so. Trading range. If this is a five minute chart, this was a trading range for about four hours. This rally has three consecutive bull bars, but are they big bull bars closing on their highs? No. They're relatively small bull bars. This one closes on its high, but these two have tails. When I see that, and then I see another bull breakout, not a very big bar, not strong follow-through, trying to go outside up, tail on top, followed by a bear bar. This rally, even though we're clearly going up, looks weak. And therefore, it's probably going to be a bull leg in a trading range, and not the start of a bull trend that goes up much further. We're breaking above the high, the highest bar to the left. And look what happened as soon as we broke out. We have a big bear bar closing on its low at the low of the prior bar. This is not how strong trends behave. So when I see a bull trend like this, it's probably going to soon be part of a trading range. No consecutive big bull bars. The bull bodies are small. Pullbacks every few bars. Lots of reversals. Some of the reversals are fairly big and contain a lot of bars. This does not look like a bull trend. It's more likely a bull leg in what would be a trading range. So bull trend, yes. But probably later on, when you look back at this, you'll say, oh, this is just a bull leg in a trading range. This was a bear leg in a trading range, a bull leg in a trading range. And it was. We have a bear channel. Fairly broad. This rally has about 15 bars in it. This rally has four consecutive bull bars. But it's still making lower highs and lower lows. Remember, broad bear channels often have times when the market is actually always in long. Maybe it's always in long here. Maybe this will be a higher low for a second leg up. Most of the time when the market's in a broad channel, it's also in a trading range. And because that's the case, traders look to buy low, sell high and scalp just as they do within a trading range. A sell off, but no consecutive big bear bars. You can say, well, Al, this is a whole bunch of bear bars here. Well, where are the consecutive big bear bars? Bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, small. Bull bar. Bear bar, doji. Bull bar. Bear bar. We're going sideways within yesterday's range. This is more likely a bear swing in what will end up as a trading range. Very good reversal and a follow through bar, but still below this micro double top. That increases the chances that this is just a test of the high and part of a developing bear channel or a bull leg and a trading range. For the bears is a small double top and a bigger double top and a lower high. Look at the reversal down. Big bear bar, bad follow through. A pair of bear bars and then bull bar, bull bar. And then a doji, tails on the bottoms of these bars. Does this look like it's going to break below this neckline of this double top and fall for a big swing down? Or does this look like a bear leg and what will end up as a trading range? Bad follow through selling still above the bottom of the bull reversal. This is probably a bear leg and what would be a trading range. It might also be a bull flag. So it could be a bull reversal and then a deep pull back followed by trend resumption up. In any case, it does not look like a strong bear trend. And you can see what followed. We have big down, big up. Big confusion usually means a trading range. We have big up and a very deep pull back, probably trading range. Here's the euro versus the dollar five minute chart. You can draw lines across the top, across the bottom. We broke below the first line. So you draw another line on the reversal up. And we have a pair of decent bull bars here, but then a bear bar. And then another pair of bull bars, but a tail closed barely at that high. And then a bear bar, a strong bull bar here, and then a bear bar. And then we've got a couple of bull bars and a couple doji's, a bull bar, and then a bar with a big tail. So it looks like this is a strong bull trend evolving into a weak bull trend, a fairly broad channel. This probably will soon become a trading range. So bull trend, but probably a bull trend that is a leg in a developing trading range. And you can see what followed. Strong bear trend and a pullback, still pretty good bear trend. But now look what's happening. Bear bar and then a pair of bull bars, bear bar, bull bar. Three bear bars, breakout to a new low, and then a reversal up, and then repeated reversals. So we have a strong bear trend and now a weaker bear trend. This looks like it's evolving into a trading range. Probably not much more down before we start to go sideways and test these lower highs. A bear channel, but lots of two-sided trading within the channel. Lots of reversals, lack of strong consecutive bear bars. Bear channel, bull flag, 75% chance at some point you get a bull breakout. Here, in fact, we ended up with a trend reversal. Bull breakout above a bear trend, and then a higher low major trend reversal. This entire rally, as strong as it is, is still below that high. And it probably will end up being a large bull leg in a big trading range. Too early to tell. Strong bear breakout. Four consecutive bear bars closing on their lows. But then look what happens here. We're starting to get dojis, and we're starting to get bull bars after the bear bars. Trying to get strong again on the part of the bears. But then we got a six bar rally. And then a tight trading range. The bears are losing interest in selling low. Fairly tight channel, but lots of small dojis. Tight channel, lasting 20 or more bars. Probably climactic. Especially when so many of the bars are dojis. Probably not much more down. And it's likely soon to get a bull breakout. And then become a trading range. This looks like trading range price action. Even though it's a continuation of this bear trend. The bears are losing steam. They're losing momentum. Starting to get a lot of small sideways bars. That's a sign that the bear channel is weakening. And what does the market tell you? That when you get a channel that's weakening, probably it's the early stages of a trading range. 70 to 75% chance you'll get a bull breakout. And maybe a couple legs sideways to up. Which we did. First leg up. Broke above the bear channel. And then a small higher low. Maybe not enough bars for a major trend reversal. It turned out that it did lead to a fairly major trend reversal. Two legs up. One pull back two. In a developing trading range. No surprise that we start to pull back. Strong bear breakout. Euro versus a dollar. Five minute chart. And then a channel. Pull backs every few bars. Lots of reversals. Lots of bull bars. Where are the consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows? That's what you'd expect to see in a bear trend that's going to go for a long distance. This does not have that. This is probably a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Strong bull breakout. Probably at least a second leg up. So first leg ends here. Pull back. Second leg. Maybe more up. But at least a second leg up. Bear channel. Sometimes it evolves into a trading range. Sometimes it reverses into a bull trend. It's a small bull trend. But we're stalling at the top of the range to the left. So this might also be simply a bull leg in what will become a trading range. Why did the bulls allow all of these bear bars? Is that typical of a strong bull trend? Also, why are we hesitating getting a double top here at a prior high? Bad follow through buying. Just like this was a weak bear trend and probably a bear leg in a trading range. This initially was strong, but it's becoming weak now. It's probably a bull leg in a trading range. And you can see bear breakout below the bull channel and then sideways for a lot of bars. When traders believe the market is just a leg in a trading range, they're confident that a rally will not go up too far before there's a bear leg in the trading range as well. And they're also confident that a bear leg will not get down too far before there's a bull leg. They're looking to buy low, sell high and take quick profits, scalp. Bulls use new highs to take profits and bears use new highs to sell. They sell and sell more higher. Bulls use new lows to buy and bears use new lows to take profits. The bulls who do buy are using wide stops, scaling in and scalping. On the way up, the bears who are selling are using wide stops, scaling in and scalping. Both are confident that no matter how strong a leg up or down appears, it's probably not going to get too far before there's another reversal. When the bears see a strong bull close near the top of the range, they sell it, betting that the bulls will not get consecutive big bull trend bars. When bulls see a strong bear bar fairly down, fairly far down in the range, they buy it, betting that the bears will not get a successful breakout and a measured move down. They'll bet that this gap will become an exhaustion gap and that there'll be a profitable scalp on the way up. With both bulls and bears buying low and selling high, chances are there's going to be a trading range. Bulls are buying low to put on long positions. Bears are buying low to take profits. Bulls are selling high to take profits and bears are selling high to initiate shorts. And that's how to trade in a trading range. You buy low and you sell high and you take relatively quick profits. And that creates a trading range. In this video, I talked about whether or not a trend that leads to a trading range will get trend resumption or trend reversal after the trading range. And then I talked about trends and whether or not they're actually a trend or a leg or swing within a trading range. If there's bad follow through, if there's a lack of consecutive strong trend bars, chances are the trend is simply a leg and a trading range. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of six videos on trading ranges. So let's see. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks. We'll see you next time. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye.