 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on breakouts. I'm going to begin by talking about exactly what I mean by a breakout. I'll then talk about my 80% rule, and that is in part that 80% of breakouts fail. Next, I want to make a point about every reversal being a breakout. And finally, since breakouts fail in our trading range, traders need to buy low, sell high, and scalp. A breakout is simply a trend bar, or a series of trend bars. So every trend bar that you see on the chart is a breakout. And sometimes you get a series of trend bars and they form a breakout. A bear breakout there, bull breakout here. They give you one bar and it can grow into several bars. A breakout always is a move beyond some kind of support or resistance. If you have a bull breakout like this, there are several resistance levels that the market is breaking above. First of all, the high of the prior bar is always resistance. Next, you have a lower high. Next, you have a trend line. Next, you have the moving average. Here, we had a double bottom and a bear breakout. Small head and shoulders top. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. And it failed. And the bulls were able to get a micro double bottom. So the bears tried to sell off and the bulls bought. The bears tried to sell off again and the bulls bought even more aggressively, creating a good buy signal bar. In this particular case, the market broke below a double bottom. And then it broke back above. So that is a breakout. A breakout back above a double bottom. As breakouts grow, they tend to go above higher and higher resistance levels in the case of a bull breakout like here. At this point, it broke above the moving average and finally got a close above the moving average. I always look at trend lines and there are different ways to draw them. I could use these two highs or I could use this high and that high. And clearly, the market is breaking above the trend line as well. So the market's breaking above a bear trend line. I said that it broke above the high of this bear bar. But I also look at prior lower highs in a bear trend. And the more resistance that the market breaks above, the more likely the breakout will have follow through and a second leg up or multiple legs up. So we're breaking above a prior lower high. And then we broke above another lower high. At this point, you can call this a trading range. Every head and shoulders top, left shoulder, head, right shoulder is a trading range. Maybe the trading range began here. We went down, we went up, we went down, we went up, down and up. It's a lower high, but it's also a trading range. So we broke below the range and then we broke above the range. My 80% rule is that markets have inertia. And 80% of the time they resist change. So 80% of the time, if the market's in a trend, reversal attempts will fail. And 80% of the time, if the market's in a trading range, breakouts will fail. And that is the reality. So the market broke above this low, reversed up, broke above this high, reversed down. And it's just repeatedly reversed breakout attempts. New high, failed. New low, failed. We tried to reverse up, failed. Broke to a new low, failed. Broke above this high, failed. Above this high, pulled back. This high, we pulled back, tried to reverse down, tried to fail. Here we tried to reverse down and we succeeded. We broke below the bottom of this strong rally. But the breakout failed. Also, a really important point about breakouts is that on any chart, any timeframe, only about 10% of the bars will be in a strong breakout that actually has follow through. And the trend bars. When the market's in a channel or a trading range, 80% of the breakouts will fail to get very far. On this slide, we have a pair of pretty good bull bars, especially this bar, followed by a bear bar. And then we have a bull flag, a one bar pullback. You can call it a two bar pullback. We started the pullback here. This bar pulled back below that bar. So this is technically a pullback on this timeframe. And it's about a 50% pullback. And it's a bull bar. Tail on top, following a big bear reversal bar. Not a high probability buy. But the market's still always in long at that point. And it is a high one bull flag. So it is a buy setup. But bull flags like this very commonly have breakouts that fail and reverse down. So a lot of traders will buy on a stop just above the high of this bar. Taking a chance that if the breakout is not successful, maybe we'll pull back for another bar or two. Hold above this low. And then resume up with a high two or a high three. As I said, this is a high one bull flag, but a pretty prominent tail above and a prominent tail below. The body is less than half the height of the bar. So I would call that a doji bar. And if the bulls see this bar, their entry bar, they're going to be disappointed. You know, they don't want to see a bear bar and they don't want to see a bar closing below its midpoint. Well, that tells us that in this particular case, there probably were more sellers above the high of this bull flag than buyers. Bears will see that. And instead of buying this breakout, they'll sell it. The bears are betting that most breakout attempts will fail and that this is a fairly decent reversal after a small two bar breakout. And it's a bad looking buy signal bar. At a minimum, it's possibly a reasonable scalp, betting that the breakout, the first reversal up from the pullback will fail. Here we have a bull breakout and an attempt to make the breakout fail. And by this bar going below the low of that bar, it triggers a failed bull breakout. A lot of traders will sell on a stop below that bear bar, betting that the bull breakout will fail and reverse down. A lot of traders will sell that, betting that the bull breakout will fail. Now remember, every reversal is a breakout of something. So we have a bear bar and you should think of it as a breakout as well. If I were to draw a trend line up from the low of this bar to the high of this bar, it would be vertical. Or I could draw a trend line from the low of this bar to the high of that bar. And it would be a trend on a smaller tampering chart in this bear bar is a reversal down. My point is that whenever I see a reversal down after a bull breakout, I think the reversal down is a bear breakout. I think of it that way. I think of it as if there was an obvious breakout here. Clearly, there's not an obvious breakout here, but it's a reversal attempt. And I think of every reversal attempt as a breakout. Now, which breakout is stronger? The bull breakout or the bear breakout? Clearly, the bull breakout is stronger and therefore it's not a particularly high probability cell below that low. Bears will take the cell, taking a chance that will just keep going down, knowing that the probability is low, but the risk is low as well. They're putting a stop above the high of the bar or above the high of the bull breakout and taking a chance that it's the start of a big bear trend. Low probability, great risk reward. This bear bar might not be strong enough to reverse that. So there might be more buyers than sellers below the low of this bar. And clearly, if you're a bear and you shorted, you do not like the bull close. You do not like your entry bar failing to become a big bear bar closing on its low. So a lot of bears are disappointed. Bear trend tried to resume down again here and they have a bear bar, but a much weaker bear bar, big tail on the bottom of the bar. So we had a bear bar here trying to get a bear breakout, got a bull bar. We had another attempt at a bear breakout, could not close below the lower of the prior bar. Just like this could not close below the lower of that bar. And here we have a close at or above the midpoint of the bar. So this is not a very good looking breakout. It's telling us that there might be more traders believing the opposite. So the bears sold, betting that the bull breakout will fail. But it looks like there probably were more bulls buying at the low of this bar, betting that the bear reversal would fail. Which is logical because most reversals fail. Most breakouts fail. Most reversals fail. Now, if a trader thinks that buyers will win above or below a bar, he should buy. Look at this rally. We have three bull bars. Not great. Big tails. But two of them closed well above the midpoint. And this one has a pretty good sized body and a close above the high of the prior bar. So there's a gap there. Is this going to be a failed bull breakout? It's a low probability short. There probably are more buyers at the low of this bar than there are sellers. So some buyers will sell looking for a move below here and a measure move down. But probably three consecutive bull bars, probably more buyers than sellers below. So probably more traders would buy. However, because of the absence of big bull trend bars closing on their highs, and we have prominent tails, a couple of small bars, the bulls know that there might be a deep pullback and a trading range. So it's okay to buy if you use the correct stock. Here at this point, we have a pair of bull bars. This one closing on its high. And it's a higher low. This is a higher probability buy than there. But both are appropriate buys. So here bulls thought pretty strong rally, probably buyers below. At this point, they see a higher low with two bull bars. And they're thinking that, well, there are probably buyers above this bar as well. So buyers below that bar and buyers above this bar. A seller, the exact opposite. If he thinks that the sellers will win, he should sell. So for example, he might say, oh, not a very good rally. The buy signal bar has a pretty prominent tail on top. We have a micro double top up and down, up and down. Maybe we'll enter a tight trading range. Maybe I'll sell about the high of this bull bar. It has a fairly prominent tail. And I'll sell there. And maybe I'll sell below this bear bar. Now we have another version of a micro double top or a micro triple top. Up, down, up, down, up. And if we're going down again with a bear bar closing on its low, it's a second entry sell for the failed bull breakout. Bull breakout, first entry sell. And then we went up again. Now we have a better looking sell signal bar. That is a higher probability short than selling below that bar. So you have bears selling above this bar and selling below that bar. A lot of the time, if not most of the time, traders are fairly uncertain what to do. That's the nature of markets. They strive for confusion. And if at any time you're not sure, then just wait. Should you buy above this bar? Should you sell above this bar? Should you buy above this bar? Sell above this bar? Should you buy or sell below that bar? If you're not sure, best choice is wait. I mentioned examples of support and resistance that can lead to breakouts. Does it matter what type of breakout it is? Break above prior higher or low, a trend line moving average? It doesn't matter. All that matters is that there's a breakout. And a lot of times if you're a beginner, you don't even see what's being broken out. But again, it doesn't matter if the breakout is strong enough, but you don't need to see or understand what's being broken. Remember, every trend bar is a breakout. Every series of trend bars is a breakout. And the bigger the bars, the more they close on their high. If we're talking about a bull breakout, the stronger the breakout, and the more likely there'll be at least a two-legged move. Here, three persons up. One, two, three. And then we have a bear bar. So it's a breakout. It's a reversal. Every reversal is a breakout. And then this is clearly a breakout. But a breakout of what? Of many things. It's a wedge top. So it's a break below the bottom of the wedge. It's a break below the trend line. Here we have a very big bull bar. A lot of bulls will put their protective stop just below its low. So it's a breakout below the bottom of a very big bull bar, a biclimax bar. Here, we have a rally. Not nearly as strong as the sell-off. And that follows through. We keep getting pullbacks. Here we have a little triangle. A bull break up above the triangle. Reversing down. So this is basically a bear flag. So we have a small early bear trend. And we test it back up. Traders will view it as a bear flag. And they'll look to sell a breakout below the bear flag. They'll also look to sell a breakout below this low. Below that low. Below the trend line at the bottom of the trend. You can see we're failing at the 60-minute moving average. This is a five-minute chart of the Euro versus the dollar. And we're failing to break above the 60-minute moving average. We failed to get above it here, here, here, and then here, and then here. And now we're starting to reverse down again. Bear breakout. Tried to reverse up. So a small bear flag. And this is a breakout below the bear flag. Another small bear flag. And this is a breakout below the bear flag. Another small bear flag. And then at the bottom here, we have a spike in channel bottom. Bear breakout. Spike. Three pushes. One, two, three. So a small wedge bottom after a bear breakout. And then we're trying to reverse up again. Every bull bar is a trend bar. It's a breakout. It's a climax. And this is a little bull breakout above the top of a wedge bottom. Channel is tight like this. Probably even a strong reversal up like this is going to be minor. A bull leg in a trading range rather than the start of a bull trend. That means that the rally probably has to test down. Here, we've got a higher low. The bulls are hoping for a trend reversal. Not likely when the channel down is this tight. You can see here we broke below that low. But then we broke above this high. Is this a major lower high in the start of a bull trend up here? No. It's not a major lower high. It did not result in a strong reversal down. It did not result in a new low. So it's a minor lower high. A breakout above it probably will not get very far. And it did not. It reversed down on the next bar. Another leg down. Another two-legged rally. Low one. Low two. So another bear flag. Break below the bear flag. And then we have a double bottom attempt. We've got a bear breakout. So that's a wedge. Three pushes down. Every double bottom is one push. Two pushes down. If the market breaks below it, that's a third push down. So even though it does not look like a wedge, it's a wedge. And it's a nested wedge because it's within a larger wedge. One, two, three. And then we have a bull trend bar. So we're getting a reversal up. We're trying to break out above a wedge bear channel. Trying to form a micro double bottom. Got a bear breakout. And then we have another attempt at a bottom. We broke below it but immediately reversed up. At this point, a pretty strong bull breakout. Well above the moving average. There are gap bars here. Gaps between the lows of the bars and the moving average. And therefore, the sell-off that tests the low of the bear trend probably will be the final leg down before we get an attempt at a major trend reversal. And here we got a higher low major trend reversal and a second leg up. We've got a bull breakout and a pullback around 50%. Bull flag. The sell-off is weaker than the rally. And we have a wedge bottom. So probably two legs up. One pullback two. And this is also a higher low major trend reversal. So bear channel. Bull flag. We've got a bull breakout. And we've got breakouts above minor lower highs. A double top attempt by the bears. Double top. Neckline. Bear breakout. No. We have a double top. And instead we've got a bull breakout. And we've got a breakout above this high. Wedge. Rally. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Other ways to count it. One, two, three. In any case, it's a bull channel. And this is a break below the bull channel. Did not get very far. Now we have a bear channel. A bull flag. And this is a breakout above it. Not particularly strong. And then we've got another bull channel. And we broke below it. We have an attempt at a higher low. And broke below it. I'm telling you that every trend bar or series of trend bars is a breakout. And a lot of times you look at the chart and say, well I don't know what's being broken out. Well, there's something being broken out. This chart is an example of a breakout. But then we're watching a bull channel. We're watching another bull channel. We have a bull channel, another bull channel. And we broke below it. We have an attempt at a higher low. And we broke below it. And we broke below it. We're trying to find thetv and the trent bar's a breakout. And we're not going to like it. I'm telling you that every trend bar. And then we've got another bull channel. And broke below it. This chart is an example of a lot of little things that are being broken up. I'm just trying to explain what a lot of the computers are seeing. The computers are looking for breakouts, and these are the kinds of things that different computers look for. Most of them are minor, and most of the breakout attempts fail. A breakout, it can be a single trend bar, and there are many terms for the same thing. You can call this a strong trend, a strong trend bar, a strong series of trend bars, a breakout, a spike, a climax, a gap, a reversal. This could be a reversal. We could have gone down here and then up here. It's all the same thing. Those are all synonyms for trend bars. This is a bull trend bar. Now which term I use depends on what took place over here to the left. If the market was selling off and reversed up, I would call this a reversal. It's still a buy climax. It's still a bull breakout. It's still a spike. Probably there's some kind of a gap between this close and something. The high maybe of the prior bar. But all that really is important is it's a bull trend bar, and so it's a breakout. Even if you don't know what's being broken out, you see a bull trend bar, it's a breakout. It's a stronger breakout because not only do we have higher price, we have more time. The market has been breaking out for a longer period of time. Three consecutive bull trend bars. Now we have three consecutive bull trend bars, even a stronger breakout. The reversal down, probably minor. It's big enough down, so we have a big up, big down reversal. Probably have to go sideways for a few bars. But this chart is still always in long. Every breakout, no matter how strong, eventually tries to reverse. But most reversal attempts fail. I've said a couple times today that every reversal is a breakout. Again, a lot of times it doesn't look like a breakout. It just looks like a reversal. And it doesn't matter if you call it a reversal or a breakout. There is a breakout there. Here we have a bear trend bar. So immediately think breakout. What did it break below? Well, it broke below this three bar bull channel. It broke below the low of this bar. It does not matter. Anytime I see a big trend bar, a bear trend bar, I think breakout. Again, the choice of the term depends on what took place to the left. Here we were rallying. Now we have a big bear trend bar. So I would refer to that as a reversal. But it's still a breakout. We have a bull breakout. And this represents a failed bull breakout. Whether that will lead to a trend or a trading range or a pause in the trend and a bull flag and trend resumption up, it's really to tell. But it's a bear reversal. It's a failed bull breakout. I've made this point many times throughout the course. That breakouts are common. Every trend bar, every series of trend bars is a breakout. Lots of bull breakouts. This is a big bull breakout made up of many smaller bull breakouts. Bear breakout, other bear breakouts. Some have two bars. Some have more. Some are just, here's three bars. Do I count that as part of the breakout? I typically do not. To me, that's a pause bar. And then we accelerate it down. So I would call that the breakout. Markets have inertia. That is my 80% rule. And by inertia, what I mean is the market tends to continue to do what it has been doing. So anytime I see a breakout like this, I look to the left. Ah, trading range. Chances are the breakout will fail or eventually fail. If I'm looking at a reasonably strong rally and I see a breakout here, chances are we're going to get some follow through buying. Because bars to the left, we've had seven bars up, seven bull bars. Now every tail on every bar is a breakout. This tail below. At one point, this was a bear trend bar with a close down here. But by the time the bar actually closed, it became a bull bar. The market traded below this low. We have a bear trend, small rally, bear flag. And it was a break below the bear flag and it failed. Now we have a low two bear flag and these bars all have tails below. That means they all represent failed breakouts. Tails at the tops of bars, failed bull breakouts. We have a bull flag. We tried to break out, failed. Tried to break out, failed. So every tail is a failed breakout attempt. Trading range breakouts. Like I said, the markets have inertia. And if the market has been going sideways, chances are it'll continue to go sideways. And 80% of attempts to have it break out into a trend will fail. Five minute chart. Euro versus the yen. Up and down repeatedly. Here we have a decent bear bar and good follow through at the bottom of the range. At a prior low, we reversed up. Here we have a bull breakout to a new high. And look at the follow through. Strong bull bars trap traders into buying high. Bulls are hopeful. Like you see a bar like this and you say, oh wow, this is clearly going to be the end of the trading range from the start of a bull trend. Well, it's not. Most trading range breakouts fail. Even very strong ones like this or like that. Beginners, they tend to buy these bull closes betting on a successful breakout. Forgetting my 80% rule that most fail. Smart bears. What they do is when they start to see strong bull bars, big bull trend bars near the top of the range, they look to sell. They can either sell with stops on a reversal down, like below that bar, below this bar. Or a lot of them will look at strong bull closes and sell the market. So as soon as that bar closes, they hit sell the market and they get filled on the open of the next bar. Every breakout is a climax. And it's at the top and a sell climax at the bottom. And 80% of those breakouts will lead to reversals. And a reversal is simply a trend bar in the opposite direction, which is a breakout. As that bears will sell strong bull closes near the top. They'll also sell reversals down, which is slightly higher probability than selling the bull closes. A pair of very strong bear bars at the bottom, terrible follow through. Another bear breakout attempt, another one, and they're all failing. Very strong bear bar closing far below this bar, but still within the trading range. Bars like that trap traders into selling low. Traders are naturally hopeful and then thinking, wow, that's so strong. This has got to be the start of a bear trend. And look at this. We had an extremely strong bull bar and now we're breaking below the low of the bar. So certainly this will end up as a measuring gap and lead to a big move down. Well, it did not break below the low of the trading range and the next bar has a bull body. Chances are this bear breakout will not get very far. And the bulls know that. So every time they see a big bear bar closing near the bottom, well, they're going to be buying those bear closes, betting that the 80% rule will apply. That bear breakouts will fail. Every big bear bar that looks like a strong breakout and the start of a bear trend, they buy. They bet that 80% of the time those breakouts will fail. Other bulls prefer to buy reversals up. So they'll buy after the breakout reverses up above bull bars here, here, here, and here. I began talking about what exactly I mean by a breakout. I then moved on to my 80% rule that 80% of breakout attempts will fail. Next I made a point that every reversal is a breakout in the opposite direction. I may not call it a reversal and I may not call it an opposite breakout. I typically call it a reversal, but it is a breakout, even though it may not be obvious on the timeframe in front of you. And finally, because of the 80% rule, if the market's in a trading range, it does not matter how strong the bull bars are at the top or how strong the bear bars are at the bottom. The breakouts are probably going to fail. So traders buy low, they sell high. And since they expect the trading range to continue, they scalp, they take quick profits. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on breakouts.