 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on support and resistance. The highest close of the day often is resistance and the lowest close of the day often is support. In part because a lot of institutional traders use line charts and they don't see the high of the day or the low of the day. They only see the highest and lowest closes of the day. Bull trends need higher lows. So the prior higher low in a bull trend is support. Bear trends need lower highs. So the prior lower high in a bear trend is resistance. I'll also talk a little bit about 50% pullbacks. I think a 50% pullback is the most important of all pullbacks. Bull trend, this is the highest close at this point. And then the market sold off. You have buy the close bulls buying there. Looking to buy more above a bull bar here. Hoping that it gets back to that high close. Where they can get out break even on their first entry and with a profit on their second. The bears try to trap bulls. The bears know there were bulls buying these closes. The bulls are disappointed. And they're now hoping to get out break even. Some bulls will place a limit order to get out at their original entry price. Some will be so disappointed by these four bear bars, they'll place a limit order just below that price. If enough bulls have their limit order a little bit lower, you'll get a reversal down from below that high close. And the bears know the bulls are doing that as well. And they want to trap those bulls. They want to force the bulls into giving up. The bulls gave up here. The bulls gave up here. So the bears are selling as well at and below this close. Knowing that if the market does not get up to that close, the bulls who are still long will have to give up. Tried to get up there. Could not. Bears will sell on the reversal down. Bulls will sell here as well. Taking the loss. Thinking that it tried to get to the high close. Could not. We're probably going lower. And bulls eventually will give up. The high close therefore is resistance. Lowest close. Support. Disappointed. Bears who sold this close are happy to get out break even. When they see the two bull bars here. Failed breakout below a prior low. Maybe a wedge. One, two, three. And then they get this bull bar. The bears who sold here are saying, uh oh, I'm in trouble. This may turn up. When they see this, they place a limit order to get out. Break even. The bulls see the same thing. And they say, ah, I think we're going up. I'm going to try to buy a test down to this low close. They see the strong reversal up. They place a limit order to buy at that low close. The same right here. We have another decent sell off. This is the low close. The bears who happen to sell that close see this and say, darn, look at that. I'm in trouble. And they place a limit order to get out break even. Or maybe a limit order to buy a little bit above that close. Just in case it does not come all the way down there. The result is this low close then becomes support. Bears and bulls are trying to buy the low close expecting the market to go higher. And they'll buy above the reversal bar expecting that bears will give up, which they did right here. Here the bears were able to get out break even. The bears have sold this low close. Here the market did not get down to their entry price. And the bears got trapped and they gave up as the market went higher. Bears sell bear closes, betting on lower prices. They see a rally and they're hoping the first reversal up is minor. Therefore some bears will look to sell below a bear bar, hoping that it gets back to the down here and they can get out break even on their first sell and with a profit on their second. The rally I think here is especially strong. And a lot of these bears now have given up on the hope of making a profit. They do not believe it's going to come all the way back down to the low close. However, some will scale in. And why would they scale in? Not to make a profit. They scale in to avoid a loss. They sell that close. They sell this bar or slightly below it. And then they place a limit order to get out break even at the midpoint of their two entry prices. And therefore this is support as well. The midpoint of two reasonable entry prices. And it's a 50% pullback. I don't have it drawn in for from this low to that high. This is about a 50% pullback. And bulls will always have limit orders to buy a 50% pullback after a strong reversal. Most traders would not take that sell. Possible trading range. Not strongly down. Bear bars. Bull bar. Bear bar. Bull bar. And then the biggest bear bar. Possibly a two leg trap. Leg one. Pull back. Leg two. So experienced traders would not take that sell. Those who did would realize their mistake after these four bull bars. And then they're hoping to get out simply break even. And not with a profit. I'm using this slide just to illustrate the point that the low close is support. Bulls buy closes. Hoping that the rally will continue. Some bulls who bought the high close. Very disappointed by the four big bear bars. They'll buy more above a bull bar here or here. Hoping to avoid a loss. However, after this much selling and the bulls look to the left and say, oh, this is a trading range. I bought the top of a trading range. I made a mistake. I'll buy more here. Not with the intention of making a profit. Getting out at the original entry price. But with the intention of trying to avoid or minimize a loss. They bought this close. They bought more above a bull bar here. And they're hoping to get out break even. At the midpoint of their two entry prices, it has to get a little bit above that price, which it did here. And the bulls getting out break even on their entire trade creates resistance. It's also about a 50% pullback of the entire bear leg. So other bears will be selling there simply because it's a 50% pullback. Most traders would not buy up here. I'm just trying to illustrate a point. There are some that would buy closes hoping for a continued bull trend. Most traders would be concerned about a double top here or a bigger double top here. Trading range price action. However, some would buy here, use a wide stop, hoping that the trend would continue up. Confident that if it reversed down, it would be a bear leg in a trading range. And it probably would come back up there later. Bull trends need higher lows. Bear trends need lower highs. And therefore, we have support and resistance. In a bull trend, the market should not fall below support. And that support becomes a magnet. The market often comes down to test it. Strong bull breakout, buy climax. The market often tests below the bottom of a buy climax. And then buyers come in. You have bears selling up here, taking profits at the bottom of the buy climax. You have bulls looking at this saying, wow, the last time the market was here, it rallied strongly. If it gets back there, maybe it'll rally strongly again. So the bottom of a very strong rally becomes support, a magnet. The market gets drawn down to it. The bottom of the entry bar, low. The bottom of the bull trend is also support. If it gets down here, probably buyers in that area as well. Bottom of the buy climax, the strong rally, the bottom of the entire bull trend. A lot of times in a trading range like this, we have a buy climax and a trend low. Two support levels near one another. The market falls below one, but not below the other. And then enters the trading range. If it's a strong bull trend, it should not be falling below significant higher lows like here or like here. And if it does, then the premise of a strong bull trend is no longer valid. If it's not a strong bull trend, then maybe it's a broad bull channel or a trading range. In either case, traders will be looking to buy a reversal up from a breakout below the support. Strong reversal down, so possibly a bear trend. And the market should not rally above significant highs if it's going to be a bear trend. The top of the bear trend or a bear leg in a trading range. This is the top of the bear trend. This is the top of the strong bear breakout. Both are magnets. And in a trading range, whenever there are two resistance levels near one or another at the top of the range, the market often goes above one and reverses down without getting above the top of the other. In any case, if you have a potential bear trend and the market starts to go above significant major lower highs here or here, the premise of a bear trend is no longer valid. It could still be a broad bear channel, but it's probably now a trading range. Possibly even a bull trend. But the idea of a strong bear trend is no longer reasonable. It's resistance. Traders will sell either with a limit order there or on a reversal down, especially below a good-looking bear bar. 50% pullback, probably one of the most reliable sources of support and resistance. By the way, I want to make the point that Fibonacci traders often talk about a 50% pullback. 50% pullback is not a Fibonacci number, but the Fibonacci traders treat it like a Fibonacci number. It has nothing to do with Fibonacci. However, it's the single most important pullback retracement level. Much more important than any Fibonacci number. Strong rally, 50% pullback. In a strong rally like this, if it starts to reverse down, bulls will place limit orders to buy a 50% pullback, betting that the bear reversal attempt will fail and that the bull trend will resume. They either buy with a limit order and a 50% pullback or on the reversal up using a stop order. The bull trend continues only if it continues to form major higher lows. A strong rally to a new high, this now becomes a major higher low. As long as the market stays above this low, it's a bull trend. Strong breakout to a new high, this now is a major higher low. This is a minor higher low. One bull bar, not a strong breakout. This is minor, so the market can fall below it and still be in a strong bull trend. Another strong reversal up. Bulls will place limit orders to buy a 50% pullback or above the high of the reversal bar or above the high of this bull bar, betting that the bull trend is resuming. It's very common for the market to dip just a little bit below 50% to test below it. And because it often dips just below 50%, traders with limit orders at 50% usually get filled. If it does not dip below 50%, a lot of these bulls who want it to buy at 50% are not filled. Instead, they'll buy on a reversal up, especially above a bull bar using a stop order. 50% pullback in a bear trend is resistance. Here's a bear trend. This is 50%. Bears will sell at 50% rally. They'll place a limit order to sell using a stop above the top of the bear trend. If they do not get filled, they'll sell on a reversal down. Here we went above 50%. They'll sell on a reversal down. Some bears will say, well, wait a minute. These are two good bull bars. I'll wait for a second entry sell. And then they'll take it here. It's also a wedge. One, two, three. Some bears sell with stop orders on reversals down. Others sell with limit orders. Stop above the top of the most recent lower high, which in this case is the top of the bear trend. It continues to be a bear trend only if it continues to form major lower highs. The bears sell pullbacks to prevent the market from going above a major lower high. Is this a major lower high? No, it's minor. It did not lead to a strong sell-off to a new low. And therefore going above it could simply still be part of a bear flag or a bull leg in a trading range. Going above this high does not end the bear trend. The sell signal bar, the sell entry bar. The top of the signal bar is resistance. The top of the entry bar is resistance. Weak bears put their stops just above either bar. Stronger bears will use wider stops just in case it evolves into a trading range and this is not quite the top of the range. Not a great sell. Probably minor reversal. Very tight gold channel. Usually the first reversal down is minor and you get a trading range. Here we got an endless pullback and a bear trend. The bears are creating signs of strength because every pullback stays below resistance. Another pullback lower high. Try to reverse up. Could not trigger the buy. Early signs of maybe a small pullback bear trend, which it was. Some bulls bought this as a small bull flag. And we're disappointed by this hoping that it gets one tick above this signal bar high. So they can get up break even. Traders know that the bottom of the sell signal bar and the top of the sell entry bar are resistance. And if the market gets there, bulls will resume. The market tried to get above there here. Could not. Tried to get above there here. Could not. So now we have a double top lower high. And you can see the bulls gave up here. It's a sign of strength on the part of the bears. You have bulls who bought for whatever reason, assuming the market would get above the entry bar high and it failed. So the bulls are trapped here. They're trapped again here. And they gave up here. And they gave up here. Double top bear flag with these two highs. The biggest bear bar occurring 20 or more bars into a bear trend. More likely an exhaustion gap. Gap between this low and any of these lows. Gap between this low and the low of the bar before the sell climax bar. Chances are the market's going to close the gap. Get above this low. Chances are it's going to go at least a little bit above the top of the sell climax bar. The top of a sell climax bar late in a bear trend is a magnet. It's resistance. Everyone knows the market's probably going to get there. This is more likely an exhaustive end of a bear trend than a measuring gap. The start of a new leg down. The biggest bear bar, 20 more bars into a bear trend. Probably an exhaustive end of a trend. And therefore the top of the bar is a magnet. The top of the entire strong sell off is a magnet as well. This is the last major lower high. Strong breakout to a new low. So it's a major lower high. And the bears are in a bear trend as long as it keeps forming major lower highs. If it gets above a major lower high, the premise of a bear trend is no longer valid. The market's either in a trading range or in a bull trend. Weak bears see a strong bear bar like this. They don't want to risk much. They'll put a stop just above the top of the sell climax bar instead of the top of the most recent major lower high. Strong bears know that the market is probably going to go above here. And they're buying back their shorts down here. And bulls know that this is probably an exhaustion bar. And they'll either buy the close or they'll buy the reversal up or they'll buy a double bottom. Expecting the market to go at least a little bit above this bar. Strong bears know the weak bears will give up. But they also know that the bulls will take profits at the top of the sell climax bar. So strong bears will sell for a scalp. And we're going to go to sell climax late in the bear trend. Usually the market is going to go at least a little bit above the high of that sell climax bar. And we have an attempt at a double top. The top of the sell climax in here. And we're getting a bull breakout above the double top. You have to be looking for a measured move up as the minimum target if it starts to go up. Maybe a measured move up based upon the height of the entire bear leg from here to here. And it looks like more computers use that for their measured move projection. And you can see a lot of profit taking right around that target based upon the height of the entire final bear leg. Major lower high. Strong breakout to a new low. Once the market gets above it, the premise of a bear trend is no longer valid. It's now either a trading range or a bull trend. On the left here, a pair of good looking bull bars. But it could be an exhaustive end of the bull trend. And the bottom of the buy climax is support. Weak bulls will put their stops here and they'll get stopped out. Strong bulls will buy here at least for a scalp. And bears who sell up here will be taking profits down there. So the bears will be buying here as well. Since we cannot see the bars to the left, we don't know if this is late in a bull trend. But let's assume that it is. The bottom of a buy climax late in a bull trend is support. It's a magnet. The market usually gets drawn to it. And usually the market dips at least a little bit below. Usually you get some kind of a bounce. And then the market decides whether it'll form a double bottom, break above the neckline, and rally for a measured move. Or a failed double bottom, break to the downside for at least a measured move. Weak bulls put their downsides in a bull trend. Weak bulls put their stops here instead of below a major higher low. Strong bulls assume they'll be able to make a profit by buying at that low, at least for a scalp. Once the market falls below the bottom of the buy climax, you have big up, big down, big confusion. Probably a trading range. In any case, the bull trend is probably over, at least for the time being. Again, we have an attempt at a double bottom. Instead, we've got the bear breakout. We've got a measured move down. And you can see, once it fell to the measured move, there was some buying. Bears who sold for any reason are taking partial profits here. The bulls know the bears will buy here. And you'll have bulls buying here as well, at least for a scalp. I began by talking about how the highest close of the day often is resistance, and how the lowest close of the day often is support. And therefore, they are magnets. Bull trends need higher lows. The bears are always trying to get the market to fall below the most recent major higher low, and therefore higher lows are support. Bear trends need lower highs. Bulls are always trying to break above the most recent major lower high, and therefore lower highs are resistance in a bear trend. 50% pullbacks, very important in all trends. Traders are always looking to buy a 50% pullback in a bull trend, and therefore it is support. And bears are always trying to sell 50% pullbacks in bear trends, and therefore a 50% pullback in a bear trend is resistance. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fifth of five videos on support and resistance. This is the fourth of five videos on the page ofeten получается Leo, who is a very Interesting 2 and a 3i Messe Center. Yet he handles the phone already, as he befrirehλάs. He's braven running running running running running as well. takes a 20th of five videos on the website. Make a 21st of five berphaek in a way to use führt exchange campaigns. So there's some amazing Pict PG guys.