 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is another in a series of videos on chart basics and price action. In this video, I'm going to be talking about the importance of volume and news. In the last video, I talked about the purpose of markets is to facilitate trading. Markets are designed to increase the number of traders placing trades, increase the number of trades being placed, and increase the total volume of trades taking place. Now take a look at this chart. The market is going down. As it's going down, we have a slightly lower low in price, but we have a lower low in volume. What will traders assume? They will assume that if we continue down, volume will get less and less and less. Markets are designed to maximize trading volume. If the market is going down and finding fewer people willing to trade and less volume, it's going the wrong direction. Because theoretically, ultimately, if it keeps going down, eventually there will be no trading at all. And that is not what the market wants. The market tries to oscillate in an area where trading volume will be maximum. Just because volume is getting less does not mean that the market has to go up to find more volume. It sometimes can find more volume by simply going sideways, entering a trading range. So lower price and lower volume. Traders are not interested in trading at this price. So they have to find a new price. If they go lower, they're going to assume there will be even less volume. So lower is not the answer. The market probably has to go higher to find traders willing to place trades. And you can see we go up a little bit here and volume goes up a little bit. A volume divergence often leads to a rally. So here price is low, lower, lower. But as it goes lower, volume is getting less as the market is going down. As the market is going down, fewer traders are interested in trading. Theoretically, if it keeps going down, no one will trade. There won't be anyone willing to sell at the low price. Therefore, a lot of times as the market is going down, volume tends to dry up. And the market has to go higher to find sellers willing to sell. Usually if the market has a bear breakout on big volume, that low is not going to be the final low in price. Usually the market will go lower, sometimes two or three times lower to confirm that the volume is getting less. The conclusion that traders make is that no one is willing to sell at this price. Everyone is happy to buy, but nobody is willing to sell. If you want to buy and nobody is selling, you are not going to get to buy. The market has to go higher to find a price where sellers will come back. This is an e-mini one minute chart. And three pushes down, so it's a wedge bottom. Not really classical wedge shape, but three pushes down. We got a sell climax, a second push, and a third push. A spike in channel bear trend. I once traded with a trader many years ago who looked for volume divergences. As the market is going down, he's looking for volume getting less. As it's going up in a spike in channel bull trend, he'd look for volume getting less, and he would look to trade the divergences. But the problem with trading that way is that if you're a day trader, you're looking for many trades a day. However, a perfect wedge bottom with a double volume divergences. Here's the first volume divergences. Here's the second volume divergences. That kind of a setup only occurs once or twice a week. So you end up watching the one minute chart all week long to find one or two trades. And you have to hope that you're actually watching the computer at the time that they occur. Do I pay attention to this? No. There are far more important other things that give me far more trading opportunities. Take a look. Here we have a bear breakout and a follow through bar. So a bear breakout and a follow through bar. But look at the volume. It's really not all that big. Do I look at the volume and say, oh, here's a bear breakout, but look how bad the volume is. I'm not going to take the trade. Or do I look at this and say bear trend, double top, lower high, bear bar closing below the low of the past 15 bars, closing on its low. I'm going to sell. I don't care what the volume is. To me, this is a sell. The volume can trick me into not taking a very good trade. And volume or any other indicator for that matter is often an excuse that beginners use to not take a trade. Even when the trade is a high probability trade. Traders often use indicators, volume, anything to talk them out of taking what is a good trade, a trade that they should be taking. I think using volume, you're not going to make any more money. Now, here we have a bull breakout. We have a sell off, a low two bear flag, two pushes up, one pull back two. And we tried to break to the downside. Instead, we broke to the upside. All right. So you say, oh, look at that big volume. We have a bull breakout. Certainly the market has to go up. Well, look what happened. Instead of going up, it went sideways and then down. Here we have a bear breakout with terrible volume. Yet the market continued down. And here we have a bull breakout on big volume. And the market went sideways and then down. So the volume was misleading on the bear breakout, talking you out of the trade. And the volume was also misleading on the bull breakout, convincing you that you should trade, that everyone's buying the breakout. And in fact, it was a failure. So I'm just using this slide to illustrate the reality that looking at volume is not going to make you any money. In fact, if anything, you'll end up losing money because you'll use it as an excuse to do something or to not do something that you should be doing. When I look at this chart, I don't need to look at volume. I know this has the biggest volume on the chart. Why? Because it's the biggest bar on the chart, by far bigger than any other bar. And in general, when you get a big bar like that, it's going to have big volume, especially in this context. We had a bull breakout above the high of the past 30 or 40 bars, and then an even bigger bear breakout. So the odds are probably 70 or 80 percent that there'll be at least a small second leg down. So I don't need to look at this volume to know that this volume is much bigger than all of that volume. When I see this, I'm selling. I don't care what the volume is. I don't care what the stochastics are. I'm selling. I'm selling as the bar is forming or when the bar closes. I place my trades based upon price action. Price action, not volume action. Volume is a false god that beginners hope will protect them from a painful loss. Like any other indicator, traders are looking for something to save them or they turn on television hoping that some very persuasive guy with a powerful title and a great demeanor will help them make money. And traders are always looking for someone who will protect them against the evil market who wants to destroy them. And that's just not real. You have to take responsibility for what you're doing. And if you see a bull breakout and then an even bigger bear breakout, it's a surprise. And whenever there's a surprise, you have trapped bulls and bears. You have bulls who are trapped in denying the reversal and they're holding long. They're hoping for any kind of a bounce to sell out with a smaller loss. And you also have trapped bears, bears who want to get short and they wait for any kind of a pause bar to sell to get at least a little bit more down. Look at this. This is the euro versus the dollar of Forex market. And there is no volume, at least for most brokers. There's no volume. Some brokers have volume, but the volume is only the volume at the price. There's no volume at one particular bank or two or three particular banks. And it really does not give you a sense of what's taking place worldwide in the Forex market. When traders are trading Forex markets, they're not paying attention to volume. So if volume is so important for trading, how can Forex markets be the most popular markets in the world when most traders who trade profitably don't see any volume? For example, look at this bar. Do I need a volume bar to tell me that a whole bunch of traders just sold here? Of course not. Just look at the bars. The biggest bar in the past 30 bars, far bigger than all the others, closing on its low, closing below the lows of all of these bars. Something important just happened. And the odds are 70% or more that you're going to get some follow through selling. I don't need volume to tell me that the market's going down. I can just look at that bar and I know that the market is going lower. Dom traders depth of market. They take trades based upon the size of orders at the bid and ask. Time and sales. This is another thing traders look at. If an order is not filled and you think your broker mess up, you can look at the time and sales to argue with the broker telling them that the trade should have taken place and that their software made a mistake. That used to be true years ago, 10, 15, 20 years ago when everything was not electronic and there were people involved in the order execution. You'd call up someone and answer the phone. They give the order to a runner, take it to a guy in the pit. The pit guy fills it, gives it back to the runner and then it gives it to the guy on the phone. So there are a lot of steps and a lot of people involved and mistakes were common. But nowadays, everything is electronic and it's extremely rare to get mistakes. If you place an order, it's going to get filled. And if there's a mistake, it's usually a mistake that you made hitting the wrong button or having the setup wrong. For DOM trading, depth of market, a lot of traders look at the size of the bid and ask orders. And there are different types of DOM trading. Some traders get depth of market with level two data and that allows them to see hidden orders and you get a very different picture of what's going on. Like here, look at the circle data. You can watch big orders appear and disappear. And in general, the idea is to trade in the direction of the big orders. Here's TradeStation. Here's Interactive Brokers. And this is time and sales. And I'm showing this slide to make the point that time and sales, especially for a lot of brokers, certainly for TradeStation, it's useless. So look at the size of these orders. One lot, two lot, three lot, four lot. And here are the times to the second. And you can see corresponding times over here. And look at the size of the orders here. 600 contracts, 32 contracts, 200 contracts. TradeStation only shows limit orders. Some traders trade at the market. Some traders enter with stops. And some traders trade with limit orders. TradeStation time and sales only shows limit orders. So looking at it is useless because you're only getting a little piece of information that really exists. It does not show market orders. It misses most of the large trade due to deconstructing the orders, taking them apart and showing them in little pieces. Interactive Brokers also shows market orders. Here's a trade with 672 contracts. Here's another trade with 202 contracts. And you do not see them at all here in TradeStation time and sales. But even Interactive Brokers has problems. So TradeStation clearly has problems. But even Interactive Brokers has problems as well. Interactive Brokers does not show every trade. They only show sampled data. They're never clear to me on the phone what they mean by sample data. So I don't know if they're showing every other trade that takes place, every third trade, every fourth trade. But they're not showing every trade. Also, here's another problem. Every now and then you're looking at time and sales. Here's the E-mini. E-mini contract. Look at this. Look at the size of this order. 330,000 contracts. And price didn't move at all. You know, maybe moved a fraction of a tick. So do you believe that someone actually placed an order that got filled with 330,000 contracts and the price did not move? No, of course not. It did not happen. You get data like that that you see that is clearly wrong and you don't know what to do with it. 330,000 contracts. When you translate that into dollars, you know, let's say the S&P is trading at 2,000 and it's $50 a point. So that's $100,000 per contract. And there are 330,000 of those contracts being traded. That's bigger than the annual budget of the Philippines. So do you think that actually took place and did not move the market at all? No. You know, this is clearly a crazy piece of data and you don't know what to do with it. Every now and then stuff happens that you don't understand. And it happens much more often in the financial markets than a lot of traders would like. For example, this is the Euro versus the Swiss franc Forex market. And look at this. The market is trading up here at 1.2 and then it's trading down here at 1.0400. A 13% gap in the currency between this trade and that trade. So this is an example of a black swan of an extremely low probability event. An event that a lot of people say is impossible. Cannot happen. There's no way the Euro can drop. The Euro versus the Swiss franc can drop 13% overnight like that. But stuff happens. Also, I have to say that I've been trading now for about 30 years. Every now and then something happens and the orders stop working. Your data stops working. Firms can go bankrupt. If your software locks up and you call, they'll say, oh, it's just a little glitch and it'll never happen again. Stuff happens. Exchanges can stop working. The order systems can be so overwhelmed. And every time it happens, you call your broker and they say, it's never going to happen again. And it happens. I have to say crazy stuff like that happens less than it did 20 or 30 years ago. But stuff happens. For example, you can get a 13% drop in the Euro versus the Swiss franc. When a typical big day would be 1% or half a percent. News. Traders a lot of times pay a lot of attention to the news. I remember 20, 30 years ago trading. Everyone would pay all kinds of attention to news reports like 7 o'clock California time. What is the federal trade deficit? For years, that was the big thing. Then for another few years, what's the PPI? What's the CPI? And traders would watch and there'd be some big move up or down. They'd put pundits on television right before the news comes out saying that if the number does this, the stock market will do that. And half the time, the market did the exact opposite of what the experts said it would do. And why is that? Because the market prices in the number before the number is released. So there's a 50-50 chance that the market is going to go up. 50-50 chance the market is going to go down. No matter what the news is. So it's not the news that's important. All that matters is the reaction to the news. Price is truth. One of the worst things I think you can do is right before some big news event comes out. If you watch the news, you'll listen to the experts on TV telling you what the market will do depending on if the news is good or the news is bad. Absolute total waste of time. They have no idea what the opinion is of the 200 big financial firms that rule the world, right, that control the markets. They may know about their firm, but they don't know about the other 199. Whatever they say at best has a 50% chance of being right. All I care about is if the market's going up, I'm buying. I don't care what the news is. I don't care what the pundits say. If the market's going up, I'm buying. That's all I care about. Institutions. All institutions have opinions about the news and about what the market should do depending on the results of an upcoming report. FOMC meeting report. You know, trade balance. Any kind of news issue. The Brexit vote. And all of the institutions try to make their price as neutral as possible before the announcement. They're all buying and selling in such a way to feel like they're in the best possible situation to make the most money when the news comes out. The news is priced into the price before the news is announced. And you don't know if they priced in too much. You don't know if they priced in too little. So the market can go up sharply on terrible news. And it can go down sharply on great news. Knowing the news does you no good. You do not make money knowing the news. You make money knowing what the market does after the news. If the television experts knew how to make money off the news, they would not be on TV. They would be trading. And frankly, I don't know why they put them on television because most of what they say is totally unhelpful to traders. Sometimes you'll hear before a news report comes out some pundit saying that if the number is X, it's bearish news. Or if the number is Y, it's bullish news. And to me, that's ignorant. It's just totally naive. All that matters is how the market reacts. I don't care if the news is bullish here. I don't care if the news is bearish here. All I know is the only way I can make money is buying. I'm only interested in buying. So if the news is bearish, yet the market goes up, that simply means that more institutional dollars expected the news to be worse than it was. So as bad as you think the news was, they priced in worse news. So when the news came out as bad, but not as bad as they thought, what happens is this, the market goes up. And nobody knows in advance how many dollars are betting that it's going to go up, how many dollars are betting that it's going to go down. You only know after the market starts to move. You've got a big bull bar here closing on its midpoint, a follow through bar with a bull body here, and then another bull bar closing on its high. Chances are the market is going higher. And I don't care about the news. All I care about is making money as a trader. Likewise, if the market goes down and the news sounds extremely bullish, that simply means that more institutional dollars expected better news. They were expecting the bullish news to result in a huge rally, and when the news was not quite as good as they thought it was, well, they priced in much better news than what they were expecting, and the result is the market can go down far and fast on good news. They always have to make the price appropriate for the fundamentals, and if they made a mistake on the original pricing, they have to adjust it. All that matters is price. Price is truth. If there's bad news but good price, you buy, and you don't worry about the news. Let's say a stock missed on the top line on an earnings report, so the revenue is less than what they expected. And let's say they also missed on the bottom line, the total profit is less, but the market still rallied. Is the report bearish if the market is going up? No. To me, if the market is going up, despite the news appearing to be bearish, the stock bringing in less money and making less profit on the money that they're bringing in, to me, that's a bullish report. All I care about is this, if it's going up, the news is bullish. I don't care if the stock did not bring in the revenue that was expected. I don't care if the company made less money than expected. The market is telling me that it's a good report. I don't care if an analyst on television is telling me, oh, yeah, boy, bad revenue, bad profit. I don't care. The market is telling me everything's good. Likewise, the stock can also sell off if it beats on the top and bottom lines. So let's say it makes more money than what people are expecting and the total revenue is greater than what people were expecting. If the market goes down, I don't care. You can call it a bullish report. I would call it a bearish report. All I care about is the market's reaction to the report, not the pundit's opinion about what is bullish and what is bearish. News is useless. All that matters is price. Price is truth. So if there's bad news, but the price action is good, I'm buying. So sometimes here traders talk about is the market risk on or risk off. And what they mean is if the market is falling sharply, traders are scared of losing money. So they want to reduce risk. So they'll say it's a risk off market. And when they believe it's a risk off market, they look for less volatile things to trade. They want to reduce their risk. So they may switch to trading consumer staples like Procter and Gamble, Coca Cola, Verizon, instead of highly volatile stocks like technology stocks. On the other hand, take a look at over here. When the market is going up sharply, traders believe it's going to go up higher. They're more willing to trade riskier stocks. So if this is the overall market like the S&P and it starts to rally sharply like this, traders expect it to go higher. This will make more money trading more volatile stocks and taking on more risk. They'll say, oh, this is a risk on situation. Instead of trading low risk stocks that don't move very much like Procter and Gamble or Coca Cola, they'll switch to stocks that tend to move more than the overall market like Facebook or Apple or even riskier stocks than that. So when the market is falling, it's risk off. Traders are going to only trade things that have less risk. When it's going up strongly, it's risk on and they'll trade things that have more risk. When you're in a risk on situation, it's a momentum situation. Traders don't care about anything other than price. They see the market going up. They believe it's going to go up more. So they'll just keep buying. They don't really care about earnings. All they know is that the market is going up. And so they're not concerned about risk. They're just concerned about probability. They know that if they buy, there's a high probability of making a reward. So they're going to ignore risk. They're going to ignore earnings. They're going to ignore news. All they know is that the probability is great. And they're more willing to trade much more volatile stocks. As I said, technology, biotech stocks, because they know those stocks move more than the more conservative stocks and they want to maximize their profit. They know this is not going to last forever. So when it's occurring, they want to be in stocks that give them the best potential for profit. Whenever the market is going up sharply like this, traders believe it's going to go up higher. So you buy here because you believe it's going higher. You buy anywhere in here, a very tight channel, basically a micro channel, no pullbacks. You buy anywhere in here because you believe you'll make money, that it'll go higher and you can sell it for more money. A lot of these traders are momentum traders. They're not buying because the market is cheap. They're buying because the momentum up is strong and they believe the momentum alone will carry the stock market higher or the price of their stock higher. They don't care about fundamentals. All they care about is momentum. They don't care about value. They don't care about earnings. They don't care about news. All they know is if they buy money, they'll probably make money. So they're just trading on probability. Traders sometimes refer to FOMO trading, fear of missing out. It's an acronym. And this is a good example of FOMO trading. When the market is racing upward, they're afraid that they're going to miss a great opportunity. So they buy, right? The institutions are judged on their performance compared to other firms. And when you get these brief opportunities to make a lot of money quickly, everybody buys. And with everybody buying, it is self-perpetuating. The market just keeps going up. Firms cannot miss big moves like this. They don't happen all that often. In general, about 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout like this. And this is where traders make their money. So they cannot risk missing one of these opportunities. As I said, only 10% of the bars on any chart look like that. And when this starts to happen, traders buy. And with everyone buying, it's self-perpetuating and it goes up. Traders are afraid that they're going to miss a big opportunity. You can call it a risk on market. You can also call it a FOMO market, fear of missing out market. It's a momentum market. Everybody's buying because they know the probability is it's going to go higher. Buying at any point in here will result in a profit. Momentum traders, they don't care about fundamentals. They buy even if the market's expensive because they're confident that the market will trade higher. So here you are buying at the top of six or seven or eight bars, 10 bars, 15 bars. Momentum traders, they don't care. They don't care about the fundamentals. All they know is the market's going up and they'll make money if they buy. They don't care if it's expensive. They don't care about PE ratios. All they care about is it's going up and they want to buy. They buy simply because the market's going up and they don't care why the market's going up. They don't care what the fundamentals are. They don't care what the earnings are. They don't care what the news is. All they know is when the momentum is really strong, they want to buy. Value traders, on the other hand, pay a lot of attention to price. They only want to buy when the market is cheap. For example, a value trader will look at this and say, wow, the market's really cheap here. And they'll buy and they'll buy more lower because if they believe value is really good, that the market is cheap, they'll buy more lower. Carl Icahn is famous for scaling into trades in falling markets. So if a stock is falling, but he thinks it ultimately is going to go up, they'll buy and it falls more. They'll say, wow, that's a good value. I'm going to buy more. Value investors pay a lot of attention to fundamentals. They know what the value of the stock should be. And if it's below that value, they buy. And if it keeps going down and the fundamentals of the company are still good, it's even a better value. So they'll buy more. Value firms only want to buy when the market is very cheap. No one ever knows what the correct price is, but value investors have a really good sense of when the market is far below the correct price. They buy as the market's going down and they buy more lower because they see it as an opportunity to buy at an even better price. In this video, I talked about volume and how traders should not pay attention to volume. I also talk about news and how you don't have to pay attention to news. All you care about is whether the market is going up or going down. You want to make money. The news doesn't tell you how to make money. But if the market is going up, you want to buy. If the market is going down, you want to sell. And it can do either on good news or on bad news. The news is irrelevant. All that matters is whether or not the market is going up or going down after the news. This is Al Brooks. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is another video on chart basics and price action.