 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on losing because of mistakes. I'm going to give some rules on how to avoid big losses, which is very important. One of the problems with a big loss is that it wipes out many good trades and it takes a lot of good trades to get back to break even. It's very important to avoid big losses. On any reasonable trade, you have a 40 to 60% chance of making money and a 40 to 60% chance of losing at least a little bit of money. Great scalpers, they are rare, but they can win 90% of the time. Let's say for example that you see a bear trend and now you see a double top bear flag, a lower high, and you sell, which is reasonable to do. You put your stop just above the top of the bear flag. You sell on the stop below the low of this bear bar and you get filled here. It's reasonable to get out above this bull bar because we have the possibility that this will be a profitable higher low major trend reversal. We have a bear trend, a strong enough minor reversal to break above the trend line, and now we have a pullback that has two or three legs down. One, pullback two, pullback three. Some computers will see it as a wedge high or low. Others will see it as a high two. High one and then high two. And it's a good buy signal bar. If you're short, I think you have to get out above this bull bar. If you're flat, you can buy this looking for a swing up. Anytime there's a reasonable opposite signal, it's usually wise to get out. If you sold this double top bear flag, bear trend, and then you see a reasonable buy setup, it's better to get out. If there's then another sell setup, you can take that other sell setup, but it's better to be out of your shorts when the bulls have a reasonable buy. Anytime that you're clearly wrong, you always should exit and don't sit there hoping that the market will go your way or go your way at least a little bit enough to reduce your loss. If you did not get out on a stop, now we have a reversal up with a decent bull bar and we have a good follow through bar after this bull breakout above this bull flag. We also have four consecutive bull bars and we have two closes above the top of your double top. You're clearly wrong. You have to get out if you did not get out already. The single most important thing that you can do to protect against a big loss is having a protective stop in the market, not in your head. The stop protects you from yourself. Some traders will see where the stop goes and not put it there just in case it goes a little bit above the stop and then reverses back down. That is a mistake. You have to have a price on the chart that tells you that you're wrong and you have to get out and take the loss. The single biggest problem with having a stop in your head and not in your market is that it tends to stay in your head and it never gets into the market. And the result is you watch the market go against you further and further and further and you never exit. You end up getting a loss that's far greater than you ever should take. One big loss can wipe out the last 20 good things that you did and it might take 20 good things over the next week or two to erase this big loss. Therefore, you cannot take a big loss like that. We have a bull trend and we have a high one bull flag that's reasonable to buy above this bar. Not ideal. A little bit of a parabolic buy climax and then a bear bar and a bear buy signal bar. However, it's reasonable to take that as a pullback in a bull trend. However, let's say you held long and then you see this bear break out in a follow through bar. What are you thinking about at this point? An expert, if he made the mistake of holding long through all of this, he would get out at the market or above the high of this bear bar. What would a beginner do? Well, if the beginner did not have a stop in the market or a stop down here or a stop anywhere and he sees this, he might think that on television they talk about averaging in. Maybe I'll average in. Averaging in, in other words, buying more in a losing position, is a great strategy if your premise is still valid, if it's still a bull trend. However, once it's clearly a bear trend or clearly no longer a bull trend, averaging in does not make any sense. The beginner, he might buy more here, arguing, well, it's a high two, maybe a trading range. And he's ignoring the reality. We've had eight or nine bars down without a bull body. We've had a strong bear breakout and we have a follow through bar after the breakout bar and it has a bear body. The odds are we're going lower. There are a lot of personality traits that all of us have that are very effective in dealing with problems in the world. And one of the things is we're genetically bred to be hopeful. And what I mean by that is that people long ago who were in trouble but gave up died. And so do their genes. And the result is people who give up tend to disappear from the gene pool. Their genes disappear. And people who are hopeful and hang in there, their genes survive and they make up a bigger percentage of the gene pool. You had a much better chance of surviving and passing your genes on to future generations if you were hopeful and you never gave up. If you exit with a loss, you're a quitter. And nobody likes a quitter. And beginners refuse to give up. And therefore they'll often add to the trade even though at some point it's clear the trade is no longer valid. Once you know the trade is no longer valid, you have to get up. You cannot be adding on hoping that you're going to be able to make a profit or avoid a loss. There's also a social stigma against quitting. So it's bad not to keep trying. Only lazy cowards give up. However, experienced traders know that it's better to be a live coward than a dead hero. The goal is to fight for money, not for principles. When a person starts out, he has a small account. He worked really hard to get the account. And he has the dream of becoming a successful profitable trader. The money in his account is symbolic. It's symbolic of the birth of his new life as a trader. And his greatest fear is an early death. He focuses entirely on risk. He does not want to lose money because if he loses his account, he loses his dream of being a profitable trader. He focuses on risk. The trader's equation has three variables. Risk, reward, and probability. And you have to be thinking about all three whenever you are structuring a trade. And then once you're in a trade and you're managing a trade. Risk is the distance to your stop. Reward is the distance to the target that you're hoping to achieve. And probability is the odds of making money before your stop is hit. Avoiding risk, focusing on one variable, is not a profitable strategy. You always have to be considering all three variables. You'll sometimes hear traders talk about a blown account. A blown account does not mean the account went to zero or went below zero. It simply means that the value of the account fell below the broker's minimum level for trading. If your account does not have a certain number of dollars in it, the broker will not let you trade. One of the problems of only focusing on risk is you assume it's the only danger. Risk implies danger. But it's not. It's not. You also have to consider reward and probability. of the account fell below the broker's minimum level for trading. If your account does not have a certain number of dollars in it, the broker will not let you trade. One of the problems of only focusing on risk is you assume it's the only danger. Risk implies danger, but it's not. You also have to consider reward and probability and you need to think about all three when you're structuring a trade. You need to take profits that are big enough to make the traders equation positive. If you take a trade that has low risk, you have a low probability of making money. That means you have a high probability of losing money and if you're only taking low probability trades, you must hold for big profits because you need those few winners to overcome all of those losses. And if you don't get an occasional very big winner, your account is slowly going to disappear. There's only one thing that you can do to consistently make money and that's do the hard work of learning how to trade. There are no magical candlestick patterns. Nothing is easy. You're competing against the smartest people in the world. If something was easy, everyone would be doing it. Every trade needs someone to do the opposite. There would not be enough smart people willing to do the opposite. Therefore, you're looking for an edge, a slight mathematical advantage that will allow you to consistently make money. And because the edge always has to be slight, you're trying to take money from very smart people, you have to be consistently good. You cannot blame anyone else for your mistakes. You have to assume responsibility for your mistakes. At the same time, you should never be hard on yourself after making mistakes or after losing money, because everyone is going to have losing trades. And if you keep focusing on what took place five minutes ago, five days ago, you're not focusing on what you should be doing right now at the moment. Great traders make mistakes. Great traders have losing trades. The difference between a great trader and a beginner is that the great trader is quick to see his mistake and he gets out. When he knows he's wrong, he just gets out. He doesn't care if it's a loss. He knows he's wrong. He has to get out. And that's what you should do when you make a mistake. As soon as you decide that, yeah, maybe this isn't working out the way I thought it should, just get out, take the loss, and move on to the next trade. Fear of death or the fear of death of your account is a tremendous motivating factor and it will make traders do just about anything to avoid it. One of the first things traders do when they start out is they look for some kind of protector, like a trading guard or a guru or some expert who will help him. They'll turn on television and take trades that somebody on television mentions. And that's just dumb. TV, internet, magazines that are filled with trading advice and it's useless, right? As a trader, you eat what you kill. That means you have to make the money yourself and nobody else is going to help you. Just because somebody on television says, oh, this is a buy does not mean you make money. Not only do you have to buy to make money, you have to manage the trade. And as it unfolds, you get more information and that makes you adjust your management decisions. The guy on television is not telling you what to do after you're in the trade. A lot of times, as soon as you get in, you decide it's a bad trade. Also, sometimes he'll say on television, it's a buy. And then tomorrow, some overnight event will have happened either with your stock or with the market that makes it a terrible buy. He's not there to help you. You have to make the decisions yourself and you have to learn how to make the decisions. Sometimes your decisions are going to be wrong. Just get out. As soon as you think you're wrong, as soon as you think your premise is no longer valid, get out. That guy on television, you're asking him to give you a fish so that you can eat. That's not how it works. Hoping that someone gives you a fish is not a plan for survival. Learning how to fish is. You have to spend time to learn how to trade. However, once you become successful, life can become magical. I've heard from many, many traders over the years who were losing money for protracted periods of time, and then they finally became successful. The amount of money that they made was astonishing. They couldn't believe how much money they were making. I've talked many times about how beginners focus on risk and how they want minimum risk because they're afraid of losing their entire account. However, because of the trader's equation, you know that if there's small risk, then the risk reward is fantastic. You're risking very little money and you're hoping for a great reward. You also know that whenever there's fantastic risk reward, the probability is low. Chances are you're going to lose most of the time. It is impossible to have a small risk of making a reasonable profit and having a high probability of achieving that goal. It just cannot happen because everyone would take the trade and there would be no one left to take the opposite side of the trade. If you're getting fantastic risk reward, the institution taking the opposite side of the trade has a high probability of making money. You have a low probability of making money, and that means you're going to lose most of the time. If you're going to lose more, the buyer's market is going to lose most of the time. If you're going to lose more, let's say you see a wedge bottom and a bear trend and a decent reversal up and now you see a higher low. Is it reasonable to buy here? Yeah, it's probably better to take a second entry buy after three bear bars, but it's reasonable. A beginner, he's going to put his stop below his buy signal bar, thinking that, oh my gosh, I don't want to lose any money. If I'm going to lose, I don't want to lose much. This is my signal bar. I'll place my stop just below my buy signal bar. Therefore, my risk is very small. Whenever you have small risk, the probability is high, you're going to get stopped out. That is just a fact because you cannot have small risk of making a reasonable reward. In this case, you're hoping for a big reward. You cannot have a fantastic risk-reward situation and a good probability of achieving your goal. The probability is always going to be low, and that means chances are if you buy above this bar and put a stop below that bar, the odds are high you're going to get stopped out. If you're taking low probability trades like this, you're going to bleed to death from 1,000 paper cuts. Think about this for a second. Let's say you win 10% of the time. When you do win, you win 20 times bigger than you lost. Well, that's mathematically acceptable. But the problem is if you take 10 trades like that and you get one winner, you have to manage that trade perfectly to make up for the nine losers, and that's unrealistic. Okay. An expert trader might take this buy. He certainly would take this buy. In either case, he would put a stop here below the bottom of the wedge, below the bottom of the reversal. He's risking more, but he's also giving himself much higher probability of making money. He's allowing for the possibility that the market might pull back and maybe even pull back more before it goes up. All he knows is he thinks it's going up, and he knows if it goes below the bottom of this bull reversal, then his premise is probably wrong and he wants to get out. Here, he could take profits at the end of the session. He bought here. He did not get out. He relied on the stop, and he ended up making many times more than his actual risk. His actual risk was from his entry price above this bar, right here, to just below the low of this bar. His actual risk is small compared to his reward. The beginner who bought here and put a stop here is risking very little. It's far easier to make money if he trades small and uses a reasonable stop, even if the stop is far away and the risk is relatively big. Much easier to make money. Use the appropriate stop and trade as small as you need to trade so that you don't worry about the amount of money he'll lose if your stop is hit. If the amount of money is too big, don't take the trade. If your stop is too far away for you to be comfortable losing that amount of money, do not take the trade. Wait for a trade that's in your comfort zone. Wait for a trade that's in your comfort zone. Low risk trading is very low probability trading, and that is a losing strategy. Again, you have to manage those rare wins perfectly to make money, or you have to be correct 70% of the time. If you're taking a low risk trade, the only way you can make money is be right a very high percentage of the time. As a beginner, that's just not going to happen. Since a beginner cannot manage perfectly, and since he's not going to be right 70, 80, or 90% of the time, he should not be taking low risk trades. He cannot make the trader's equation positive, and with a negative trader's equation, by definition, it's a losing strategy. Experienced scalpers sometimes will use tight stops, and that's because they know where a high probability trade is, and they know how to structure a high probability trade. A really good scalper is going to make money 80 or 90% of the time with his trades, and that's absolutely impossible for beginners. It's actually absolutely impossible for most really experienced traders. There are very few experienced, very profitable scalpers. And part of the problem is, first, it's hard to do, and the other is it has to suit your personality, and most traders would not be comfortable with that style of trading. The math is better. In this case, buying here, we have a higher low major trend reversal, two or three legs down, one pullback, two pullback three, or a high two, high one, high two, and a higher low major trend reversal with a good-looking buy signal bar. In this particular case, you have a good-looking buy signal bar. You have a wedge bull flag, small bull trend, bull flag, higher low major trend reversal. It's reasonable to buy above this bar and put a stop here, or you could still put your stop down here. However, if this trade is good, after three attempts down, one, pullback two, pullback three, if it goes above this bull bar, it should not go below the low of that bull bar if the trade is good. If it goes below the low of this bar, the trade is probably not good. This is an example of when you can use a tight stop. In this video, I talked about some rules for avoiding big losses. One of the most important rules is you always have to have a stop in the market, not in your head. Another is if you think your trade is unfolding different from what you were expecting, get out. If you think you're clearly wrong, get out. Just take the loss and don't worry about it. And finally, avoid low-risk trades. Use the appropriate stop. If the stop would result in a loss that is beyond your comfort level, do not take the trade. Just wait for a trade that would allow you to use a smaller slot. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the third of four videos on losing because of mistakes.irsiniz but bad, you may be better.