 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of three videos on Always In Trading. In this video, I'm going to be talking about the characteristics of trading when the market is always in long and when it is always in short. Always in long, that means that if I had to be in the market long or short, I want to be long. It simply means that more dollars are on the buy side. There's more buying pressure than selling pressure. Compare the strength of this rally to the strength of that sell-off or the strength of this sell-off. The rally is stronger. So higher prices are likely and I think it's better only to look to buy. What do you buy? Well, there are many ways to buy. You can look to buy pullbacks. The key is your stop location. The stop is down at the bottom of the bull breakout. Whenever the market has a high probability of doing something, the risk reward is usually bad. And that means the stop is usually far away. Buying anywhere in here, you're probably going to make money, but you have to use the correct stop down here. Bulls, they'll buy that close. They'll buy above this bar. Those are not ideal. Maybe they'll buy this pullback, but eight bar bare micro channel. Better to take a second entry buy here. Also a small wedge, one, two, three. Nested wedge, one, two. Either one of those. And then three. Around a 50% pullback from the original breakout. And a reversal bar. So buy above this bar. Or if you prefer to buy above a bull bar closing on a tie, you buy above here. Or you buy any of these other bull flags. It doesn't matter where you buy. If you buy at the market here, you buy closest, buy below bars, buy above bars, buy these pullbacks. The stop is the same. It's below the bottom of the bull breakout. Here's a five minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. Very strong bull breakout. Clearly, always in long. Clearly, the odds are it's going higher rather than lower. Stop way down here at the bottom of the bull swing or at the bottom of the bull breakout bar. Again, you buy for any reason. You buy at the market as this bar is forming. You buy this bare close, spending the reversible fail. You buy below bars. You buy above bars. And as long as the market keeps forming higher lows, especially higher lows that are major. Recently strong bull breakout to a new high. This is a major higher low. Here, higher low. And then we get a pretty good bull breakout. This is a major higher low. As long as it continues to form major higher lows, bulls will keep buying pullbacks. And they'll buy for any reason. Initial stop down below the bottom of the bull leg. And then after each strong breakout to a new high, bulls will trail their stop. They'll raise their stops to below the most recent major higher low. And they'll keep buying. They'll keep buying until there is a credible top. Triangle, three pushes down. One, two, three. It does not matter that this high went above that high. The pullback began here. Sometimes part of the pullback is at a new high. Bears trying to reverse. A wedge, one, two, three. Wedge, one, two, three. Trends are constantly trying to reverse. But unless there's a clear major reversal, traders will continue to buy. So a high one buy, high two buy. Triangle, late in a bull trend, often becomes the final bull flag before you get a pullback or a reversal attempt. So a lot of the bulls might exit over here. A micro double top, up, and then a bear bar, and then up again, and then a bear bar. Might be evolving into a trading range. So a lot of bulls will exit there. Always in short. So if the market is probably going to go lower, you want to be short. Always in short means you believe the market is going lower. That means there are more dollars on the sell side. More traders interested in selling. And as a result, you get more selling pressure than buying pressure. Compare this selling with this buying and this buying. The bears are obviously stronger than the bulls were here. And here we have four more or five more bear bars and only one bull bar. Probably we're going to get trend resumption down after this trading range. And because lower prices are likely, traders should look to sell. They can sell for any reason. When the market's in a trading range like this, a pullback. A lot of traders prefer to sell pullbacks. A low one short, low two short. Head and shoulders top, bear flag. A low one, low two. Doesn't matter what you call it. Bear flag, bear breakout, a two-legged pullback. Doesn't matter. Traders are looking to sell breakouts below bars, betting that the trend down will resume. Until there's a strong breakout, traders are going to keep their stock above the most recent strong bear breakout. The most recent major lower high. When do they lower their stock? Maybe at this point, after five bars down, they might lower their stock to above here or above here. Again, traders will look to sell pullbacks and sell for any reason. They'll assume that any rally attempt will not get above the most recent major lower high. And they'll hold through reversals. And always in short trader. Will he get out here? No, probably not. Would he get out here? No. Would he get out here? No. So he's going to hold short with the stop up here until we get a breakout or a breakout. And then he'll tighten the stock. Some traders are scalpers and they short and scalp out, short, scalp out, short, scalp out. Most traders should not do that because they'll find it hard to sell again. So it's better simply to stay short, get short for any reason, take any one of these cells or sell this breakout and hold with your stock in the appropriate place and let the trade go as far as it will go. Here we've got a pretty strong bull trend, a bull flag. Then we've got a bear breakout below the bull flag. And then we've got a bear breakout and follow through. So somewhere in here, traders are concluding that it's no longer always in long. Even though this might simply be a 50% pullback in this bull trend. Very tight bear channel. And now we're trying to get bear bars and consecutive bear bars. So probably traders will sell the first reversal up, which means it's probably better to be short than long. So we've got three bear bars, you've got nine bars down, always in short, probably sellers above these bars. And we'll probably get a second leg down. Wedge, three pushes up, one, pull back two, pull back three. So a low three short, about a 50% pullback of the initial sell-off. And we've got a second leg down, we've got a third leg down. Traders are looking to sell. A low two bear flag, a wedge bear flag. A pullback near the moving average, around a 50% pullback. Gap bar, reasonably strong sell-off. It's a gap bar for the bulls as well, but the channel down is too steep. The bulls would need a double bottom, they did not get it. And for the bears, bear trend and a gap bar. Short, below, but a gap bar usually means there's not too much more left to the trend. If the bulls are strong enough to put a bar completely above the moving average, they're probably strong enough to limit the downside and convert the market into a trading range before long. You can call this a low two, low one, low two, or a low three. Triangle, one, two, three. Or triangle, one, two, three, four. But it's another bear flag, so traders will sell the breakout. Or they'll sell below that bar. Down here, gap bar, probably not much more down. And we're still above this low. And three pushes, one, two, three. Strong enough breakout again here for a second leg down. Strong enough breakout here for a second leg down. Second leg down. Second leg down here is strong enough, so we'll probably get one more leg down. And the result is a wedge bottom, one, two, three, and a higher low. Also, look at the height of the breakout. The open of the first bar, close of the final bar. That often results in a measured move down. So down here, we're around a measured move down. We have a wedge bottom and a higher low. If the market starts to turn up here, the bears will exit. And bulls will start looking to buy. It's not always in long here. But bulls will start believing that it's always in long somewhere in here. And always in trade usually begins with some kind of a breakout. Here you can call it a wedge top. You can call it a final bull flag, a second final bull flag. Doesn't matter. We're starting to trade down. And then here we've got a big bear bar breaking below this attempt at a bull flag. The bulls are hoping for a double bottom bull flag, maybe a wedge bull flag. They're hoping for the market to stay above the bottom of the wedge. Instead, we've got to close below the low of the past 10 or 20 bars. The biggest bear bar on the screen. And there's a good follow through bar. At this point or this point, traders are concluding the market's always in short. At a minimum, they're expecting at least a second leg down. So we have consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows. And we have a bear breakout with a good follow through bar. Odds are going lower. You can sell for any reason. A lot of traders like to sell pullbacks. They feel like their stop is closer. A lot of traders do not feel comfortable selling at the market or selling breakouts. So they sell pullbacks. They either sell above bars or with stops below bars betting that the trend will resume down. Initial stop, top of the bear trend. But then once you get a strong breakout like this, if you're selling down here, your stop is above the top of the most recent major lower high. It's major because it's followed by a very strong breakout. And especially if it goes to a new low. Is this a major lower high at this point? Maybe not. But once we get down here, then this is a major lower high. And traders will put their stop here, maybe here. You stay short as long as there is no credible buy setup. And if there is a credible buy setup, then you get out of your short and you possibly get long. So strong bear breakout, spike in channel. Three pushes, one, two, three. You might expect a couple of legs up, maybe one, two. Well, that's only five or six bars and that's not really enough to correct this. So we'll probably get more up. But look down here. It's a little too short. Are we always in long here? Bull breakout, not really good follow through. Bull breakout, follow through and more follow through. Are we always in long? It might be, but compare the strength of the sell off to this rally. We're still below the most recent major lower high. And the rally lacks consecutive big bull trend bars and it has a lot of small bars with prominent tails. While we're going up and some traders might think of this as always in long and they'll trade it long. Realistically, it's still more likely a bull leg in either a broad bear channel or in a trading range. I think we're probably still always in short. Although I don't have a problem exiting at any point, especially here, breakout follow through. We have a wedge bear flag and we're getting a bull breakout. Not so strong that I'm expecting a lot more up, but we might go a little bit more up. But if you do get out of your shorts or if you do get long here, you have to look to sell again below a strong bear bar. Betting that the resumption down will begin. We have a low two and then we have a bull reversal. So a lot of bears will exit above that bull bar and then just wait for the next sell signal before selling again. Always in short still, but a lot of bears will get out and not get long. Many always in traders will step aside. Here we're still always in short, but enough of a reversal so that we're probably going higher. So a lot of bears might get out maybe above the high of this bull bar because it's a bear flag. We're getting a bull breakout. Might go up for a measured move up. The trader still considers himself an always in trader, but sometimes it'll step aside for a few bars. This is unusual to step aside for that many bars. A lot of traders will buy above the high of this bar or that close knowing that we're probably not going much higher, but they'll take a chance. If you did get out here or if you went long here, you're still always in short. You have to look to sell again, usually below a bear bar like here. It's a pretty tight bull channel, but it's a nested wedge. Three pushes one, two, three different ways to draw it. One, two, three, and then you get a bear bar and you got a slightly lower high. So we're still below the top of a major lower high. So it's a double top lower high bear flag. And we never clearly went always in long. If the bears get out here, if traders bought here, they go back to short here. Big down, pretty big up, probably trading range, but still always in short. So traders will sell here. And until the bulls get a credible buy setup, bears will keep selling. Higher low, major trend reversal here. Head and shoulders bottom, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. But six or seven bars down, a low probability buy. Here, now we have a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. Wedge bull flag, maybe one, two, three. This is a better looking, higher low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout. Too much selling pressure to take this buy. But now we have a double bottom and a micro double bottom. We have a first entry buy here, a second entry buy here. Both have bulls signal bars. This is a good area for the bears to get out. And a lot of bulls will get long here, taking a chance that we're going to get a major reversal. So bears will take profits where the bulls will buy. If you're not particularly good at exiting and then selling again, then you just stay short and ride through this rally. Looking at it thinking that it's a weak rally. So at best it's probably a bull leg in a trading range. And that will come back down to this price level. And if you're disappointed by the extent of the rally, you can get out break even. Protective stop again above the most recent major lower high. I would take profits here if I were always in short. If I sold for any reason, this is where I would take profits. A credible double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. And a wedge higher low, one, two, three. And a second entry buy, both buy signal bars having bull bodies. And this one closing on its high. This is fairly difficult. You're looking at the market, not doing much. And then you see a bear breakout and follow through and more follow through. You know the market's going down. And you know your stop is up here. So what do you do? You have to sell. You can sell closes, sell the market, wait for a pullback. But you're risking missing a big bear trend if you're waiting for a pullback. It's usually better just to sell a close, put a stop up here and trade small enough so that you don't lose more than you could typically stand in. You could typically stand to lose. A lot of traders like to sell the close. It's probably a sell the close bear trend here or here. So bears will sell closes all the way down. You don't have to sell every close, but sell at least one. You know your stop is here. So trade small enough. If you're planning on selling more, if we pull back, you have to trade small enough so that the combined position is not so big that you are risking more than you do in any other trade. Good way to enter. As soon as the bar closes near as low, you just hit sell the market. I call that sell the close. Stop above the top of the most recent major higher low. Major because very strong bear breakout and a new low. It should not get up above this bar if it's still in a bear trend. And you're selling because you believe it's in a bear trend. And you're selling because the probability is that it's in a bear trend. 60% or higher probability that we're going at least a little lower. Again, if you stop is far away, your risk is big. So you have to trade smaller. Some traders are not willing to sell closes or sell at the market as it's falling. Instead, they wait to sell the pullback. Believing that the breakout is so strong that the first pullback will attract sellers and it will be followed by lower prices. Trying to reverse. Do you think this is going to lead to a reversal? Or do you think it's going to lead to a bear flag? Probably a bear flag. So you sell below bars either there or a low too short here. When the market's clearly always in long, your stop is below the most recent major higher low. So at some point in here, traders assume it's always in long. Stop goes here. And they're disappointed by that. However, is that enough to make it always in short? No. So it's still always in long. You might get out here and then buy again above a bull bar here or here. But it's still always in long. Pretty good bull breakout here. Probably trend resumption. Even though it did not go to a new high, a lot of bulls will view this as a major higher low. And they'll put their stop here. And certainly at this point, when we're at a new high, this is clearly a major higher low. So they'll put their stop here, maybe even here after this bar. So if you're looking at the market, you can see the market's going to be a little higher. Here, the bears tried to break out. Failed. Tried to break out again. Failed. If the bears repeatedly try to do something and fail, they'll probably stop trying, which means the market probably will have to go higher to find sellers. Small double bottom, micro double bottom. Around a 50% pullback. And this is clearly stronger than this. So still always in long. In a bear trend, stop is above the top of the bear trend or the top of the most recent major lower high. Strong bear breakout. So stop is up here. Is this strong enough to put the stop here? Or is this part of a trading range and we might go a little bit higher? I don't know. You can argue that this is a strong enough bear breakout so that it should not get above these bars and you could tighten your stop. After this, three consecutive good bear bars closing on their lows, traders would trail their stop down either to above the high of this sell climax or the high of this bear leg. Resistance is a magnet. If you have a stop here, that means you believe its resistance and the market will not get above it. But very often, the market will try to get to it and test it. Rallies get vacuumed up to test stop locations. And if the bears are still in control, they'll prevent the stops from getting triggered. They'll sell anytime it gets near a stop. We tried to reverse up here and failed. And we're trying to reverse up again a second time. Higher probability. Bear trend, bull breakout. Lower low, major trend reversal. Maybe a final bear flag. Is this enough to make it always in long? Well, I usually like to see consecutive big bull trend bars closing on their highs. We have a bull bar, bad follow through. Bull bar, bad follow through. Even though we're above that high, it's possible that we're still always in short. This is good for the bulls. They needed one more bar. Instead, they got a bear bar. So to me, this is still probably always in short. I'm not opposed to being long here. Betting that the first pullback will be bought. But the bears, I think, have to be thinking about selling below a bear bar. Maybe below this bar. Maybe wait for some more selling. Most reversals fail. Even strong reversals like that and like this. Especially when you see bad follow through, bad follow through. Close barely above this high. This is not clearly strongly bullish. It might be a bull leg and a broad bear channel or in a trading range. So bears will sell. They see a strong bull breakout. They believe it's going to fail. Fail to have good follow through buying. So they'll sell that close betting on the next bar being a bear bar. And they'll sell the reversal down. Failed breakout. The same is true here. A bull breakout, but bad follow through after this bull trend bar. Not a particularly strong buy signal bar. And bull breakout here, but big tail. Traders will sell the close. They'll sell with a limit order at that high. They'll sell a reversal down. Taking a chance that this is simply a bull leg in a trading range, which would be a pullback on a higher timeframe chart. And they'll bet that we'll get a second leg down despite all of this. This is also an expanding triangle. You can use any of these highs. One, two, three, and then low, lower. So an expanding triangle bear flag. It's really pretty neutral, but the bulls never did enough to convince traders that they were in control. Even with all of these bars and the probability getting close to 50-50 for the bulls and bears, the bears still have a slightly higher probability. And I think we're still always in short. So better to look to sell. In this video, I talked about some of the characteristics of always in long and always in short. I'm Al Brooks, and thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the end of the second of three videos on always in trading. in this video, I k Н etc. With you today, I hope you'll be lying over here before you go. Why should you lose time out of time? I could remember when you guys in front of my eyes. When youibile What about aquí? Entscheidung and I'm Zheng, how it's borrowing? Marshall and I'm proposing to raise your hand. gustado medal never anything about you,派 полит second. What about how the long of this MARK