 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on major trend reversals. I'm going to begin with major trend reversal bottoms. Next I'll move on to head and shoulder reversals, tops and bottoms. And finally, major trend reversals often fail, and I'll talk about failed reversals. Here we have a bull trend and then a pretty good bear trend. If I were to draw a trend line, it would be here. The first thing I need to see is a break above the trend line. I prefer the break to be relatively strong. For example, 5 to 10 bars reach the moving average, and even better if there's a gap bar, the low of the bar above the moving average. That means the bulls were strong enough to put a bar completely above the moving average, and that is a sign of strong bulls. Usually the next leg down is the end of the trend, and the market tries to create a major trend reversal. A rally above the bear trend. That makes traders think that maybe the bear trend is ending, maybe it's becoming a trading range, or a bull trend. Next, you want the pullback to reach the moving average. You want the rally to have signs of buying pressure. For example, big bull bars, you want it to reach the moving average. You want it to get far above the trend line. You prefer the pullback to be 10 bars or so. Sometimes it's fewer, sometimes it's more. You do not need consecutive big bull trend bars closing on their highs, but it's better if you have them. Here we have one big bull trend bar, bad follow through, and then another big bull trend bar, but close above the moving average. Here we have a rally with very good buying pressure. We have a bear trend. The trend line does not have to be perfect. Here's an approximate trend line. We have a breakout. Three consecutive bull bars. One closing on its high, two closing near their highs. Very good buying pressure. Even though it's only three bars and not 10 bars, the buying pressure is very good. And that is often enough to make traders wonder if the bear trend resumes, will the bear trend resumption fail? Will it simply be a test of the old low? And then the market reverses up a second time. It reversed up here. The first reversal up is minor. Usually leads to a trading range. However, that second reversal up often can lead to a swing trade. The break above the bear channel, better if it's 10 bars, or if you have two or three or four very strong bull bars, that's all you need as proof that the bulls are strong enough to take control. The bears tried to reverse down again, and they failed again. Look at this bar. The low of the bar is above the moving average. That is a gap bar. That means the bulls were strong enough to put a bar completely above the moving average. That is a sign of strength, and it usually leads to the final leg of the bear trend before an attempt at a major trend reversal. So when you see that, especially after a very strong rally, you should watch the next sell-off and look for a reversal up. If it comes from a higher low, it's a higher low major trend reversal. If it comes from exactly at the prior low, a double bottom major trend reversal. If it comes from a lower low, lower low major trend reversal. Moving average gap bar often leads to the final leg of the bear trend. Look for a reversal up after the bear trend resumes. Bear trend resumes. Look for a reversal up. A second entry buy. You don't want to be buying above a weak bull doji after two big bear bars. Not likely to reverse it. Probably a minor reversal. But when you have a second entry buy and a higher low, double bottom with the bottom of the bull breakout. This low, double bottom with that low. That is a reasonable buy for a higher low major trend reversal. You buy with a stop just above the high of this buy signal bar, and you get filled on this bar. Bear trend. I can draw a trend line. We have a reversal down, reversal down. I can draw a trend line. We broke above the trend line. I could draw a tighter trend line here and call this the break. Doesn't matter. Here, the rally is about six or seven bars, and we have a gap bar. When you see that gap bar, traders will watch the next sell off. Will the market reverse around the prior low? Moving average gap bar, the market usually evolves into a trading range or into an opposite trend. You can call this a lower low major trend reversal. Not really ideal. When the channel is this tight, very little buying pressure, very few bull bars, usually the reversal up will not get very far. Usually the reversal up is minor, and it will result in a trading range. But once you have a trading range, you then can get another attempt at a major trend reversal. You can also call this a wedge bottom. One, two, three. A wedge is a channel. I could draw a line across these lows, and this is a bear breakout below a bear channel. 75% chance you'll get a reversal up. It's also a second failed breakout above this low. Tried to break out, and it looks like it's trying to fail. We have a pullback. And then we're trying to reverse up again, a second time the breakout below this low is failing. It's a higher probability buy. Two bar reversal, good looking bull bar, and it's a reasonable buy. Is it a true major trend reversal? It might not be because the channel is so tight. However, it's a reasonable try. And then this rally had six, seven, eight consecutive bull bars. We have gap bars. If the bear trend tries to resume again, odds are we'll get another attempt at a major trend reversal. For example, here, a higher low major trend reversal. This is a test of the buy signal high and a good reversal up again a second time. Traders bought above this bar, got a strong rally. We're coming down to that price again, and they're buying again. Here's an example of a major trend reversal that led to a trading range instead of a bull trend. Remember, only 40% of major trend reversals result in swing trades. 60% result in a small profit or a small loss. And during those 60% of trades, usually your overall profit picture is break even. You lose some, you win some, and the wins and losses cancel each other out. But you need that 40% of the time creating swing trades to make the strategy profitable. Whenever there's a bear trend, you should always be drawing lines. It's a reminder that if we break above the bear trend line, and then the bear trend resumes, that resumption might be the end of the bear trend. A bear trend, draw a line. Is this a major reversal? Is this a major reversal? No, not much buying pressure. Probably a minor reversal, which means either a bear flag or a trading range. It's a minor higher low, not a major higher low. Another reversal down, draw another line. Does this look like enough bars to lead to a major trend reversal? No, it's probably simply a minor reversal again. So the low that you get afterwards, probably not going to be a major reversal. You can say we have a bear trend, and all of this is the break above the trend line, and it is. However, a very tight bear channel, just like this is a very tight bear channel. When you have a very tight bear channel, usually the reversal up is minor, and the bear trend resumes. And here, we ended up simply staying sideways. Lower low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, break above the trend line. Resumption of the bear trend, and it's reversing up again. But very tight bear channel. Not much in terms of buying pressure, not many bull bars. Probably this reversal is minor, and it probably will lead to a trading range, or maybe even another bear flag. Reversal down, draw another line. The market broke above the top of the channel. So, when the market gets down near the low, look for a reversal up for a possible major trend reversal. Moving average gap bar, a sign of strong bulls. Several bull bars closing near their highs, a sign of strong bulls. The bulls were able to own the market for about 8 bars or so. That's pretty good. Maybe they'll be able to stop the bear trend, and either convert the bear trend into a trading range, or into a bull trend. When you see the bear trend resume, maybe the next reversal up will lead to a major reversal. Again, lower low, major trend reversal, but a very tight bear channel. Not many big bull bars. Probably this is going to be a minor reversal as well, leading to a trading range, a deep pullback. You can start the process over again and draw a new bear trend line, and look at this as the break above that bear trend line. We have a series of gap bars here. Next reversal down probably will result in another major trend reversal attempt. And it did, and you'd buy that. The bear trend is resuming. So bear trend tried to reverse, bear trend is resuming, but it reverses up again on the test of the original entry price and a test of this low. It's a major trend reversal, a reasonable buy. Yet it resulted in a trading range and end of the bear trend instead of a reversal into a bull trend. Remember, only 40% of the time will a major trend reversal actually lead to a major reversal into a swing up or a bull trend. Whenever you have a lower low major trend reversal or a double bottom major trend reversal, you're expecting at least a couple legs up, one pull back, two. And that pullback is therefore a higher low major trend reversal. When you get a higher low trend reversal, you really only are expecting one leg up because you've already had a first leg up. You're getting a reversal, first leg, pullback, second leg. That's the minimum objective. If you take the lower low major trend reversal entry, you expect two legs up. If you take the higher low major trend reversal entry, you may only get one more leg up. So you have to make decisions on what to do with profit taking. I want to talk a little bit about head and shoulders patterns. We have a bull trend. I can draw a trend line. I can draw a trend line that way as well. And I have a lower high major trend reversal. Here I have a higher high major trend reversal. Every head and shoulders top is a higher high major trend reversal and then a lower high major trend reversal. It doesn't matter whether you call it a head and shoulders top or a major trend reversal. But anytime you see a head and shoulders top, you know there was a higher high major trend reversal and then a lower low major trend reversal. The lower high, it means the bulls were not strong enough to get above the prior high. So, weak bulls. And you have to assume either the bull trend is ending or pausing, maybe we get a trading range, or the bears are strong enough to create a bear swing. A bull trend needs higher highs. If you get a reversal down from a lower high, you have to be thinking that maybe the bull trend has ended. Another bear trend, I could draw a trend line here. I could draw a trend line there at the top of a channel. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. It's a major trend reversal and it's a head and shoulders bottom. The left shoulder has a small double bottom in it. The head has a small double bottom in it. And the right shoulder, here, right shoulder or you can call this a double bottom right shoulder. The market broke above a bear channel and we got a lower low. Lower low major trend reversal. We broke above another trend line and now we have a higher low. Higher low major trend reversal. Every head and shoulders bottom has both a lower low major trend reversal and a higher low major trend reversal in it. The bears failed to make a new low, so the bears are getting weaker and the bulls are getting stronger. A bear trend needs lower lows and if you get a higher low, you have to be wondering if the bear trend has ended and the market has converted into a trading range or into a bull trend. Nested patterns, a pattern within a bigger pattern are common and they're especially common with head and shoulders tops and head and shoulders bottoms. Here we have a head and shoulders top, a weak bull trend, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. But look at that left shoulder. Within it, there's a smaller head and shoulders top. Hard to see the right shoulder, but there it is. And look at the head. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. So there's a small head and shoulders top nested within the head of a larger head and shoulders top. And the right shoulder itself. It subdivides into a smaller head and shoulders top. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Very common to see nested patterns in head and shoulders patterns. Head and shoulders bottom, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. The left or right shoulders and the head often contain double bottoms. Here we have a double bottom for the left shoulder and for the head and for the right shoulder. And you can also call this a small head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, and right shoulder. So we have nested reversal patterns. Within the large head and shoulders pattern, there are smaller reversal patterns as well. A bear trend, a bull break, mostly going sideways for about 20 or 30 bars. Tight trading range. Major trend reversals often contain double bottoms, especially when the break above the channel is a tight trading range where the market goes sideways. There's often a double bottom in there. And that double bottom is a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. Whenever you see a tight trading range breaking a bear trend line, look for a double bottom. Double bottom, buy the reversal up. Probability, only 40% chance you'll get a swing up. But the risk is small. You're buying above here, stop below here. Major trend reversal top. There's often a double top within it. Here's a head and shoulders top. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Can you call this the head? It doesn't matter. You got a push up, reversal. A push up, a second push up, reversal. And then a right shoulder. Remember, every head and shoulders top is a major trend reversal. Certainly the right shoulder is a lower high, major trend reversal. Sometimes the head is not major. For example, if you call this the left shoulder, right shoulder, is this a lower high? I don't know. To me, this is not a major reversal. This could be. Bold trend, bear break, and then a test of the old high. Most computers would read this as a head and shoulders top, with this the left shoulder, and then the head having a double top, and then this as the right shoulder. You can call this a double top. You can call it a wedge. Three pushes up here. One, two, three, or one, two, three. So it's nested as well. There's a smaller reversal pattern within a larger reversal pattern. There's also a triangle top. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Triangle is a breakout mode pattern. It can lead to trend resumption up or trend reversal down. Again, the right shoulder is a double top. The left shoulder is a double top. The head is a double top. So you have nested reversal patterns. Smaller reversal patterns within a larger reversal pattern. A bull trend, a bear breakout, and then a high, and the high is followed by a tight training range. Whenever you see a tight training range after a potential top, always look for a double top within it. Because that double top can be a double top that leads to a reversal down. Here, we have a high. This double top is slightly below that high. It could be slightly above. It could be exactly at that high. However, whenever you see a double top and a tight training range after a possible top, you have to be thinking that this tight training range might be a major trend reversal. You could say the bear trend began here since this is the high of the entire move. And that would make this a double top bear flag. So, early bear trend and then a double top bear flag. I view it as a double top lower high major trend reversal. If you want, head and shoulders top, left shoulder, head, right shoulder, or left shoulder, head, and right shoulder here. It doesn't matter. You have to be aware of what the process is. Don't worry about the terms. We have a bull trend, a bear breakout, a resumption of the bull trend, and it's stalling. And you're in breakout mode. You might get trend resumption up. You might get trend reversal down. Be prepared to sell if it starts to go down. Here we have a strong bull trend. And then we went sideways for about 20 or 30 bars. And we have a double top within that tight training range. It's slightly above this high. However, whenever you have a tight training range after a bull trend, and then you have a double top in the tight training range, you've got to be thinking about the possibility of a major trend reversal. Double top in a tight training range. This time it's a higher high. This is a type of major trend reversal. If you want, you can say bull trend, bear breakout with a tight training range, and then a higher high major trend reversal. That formed a double top. The goal after any reversal, any major reversal, is two legs and ten bars. Minimum goal. Leg one, pull back leg two. About 20 bars here, 15, 20 bars. That's the minimum goal. It could result in a huge bear trend. But the minimum goal from any major reversal is ten bars and two legs. Whenever the two legs are in a very tight channel like this, you have to wonder, maybe this is the first of two larger legs down. This might be the end of it. One, two, or a tight bear channel. It could be a first leg, and then a pull back, and then a bigger second leg. And then this is the first leg that's subdivided into two smaller legs. And then a strong reversal up at the prior low. All patterns fail. And they fail often. Most patterns fail at least 40% of the time. Major trend reversals only lead to profitable swing trades 40% of the time. That means basically they fail 60% of the time. We have a bull trend, a break below the trend line, higher high major trend reversal, and then an attempt at a lower high major trend reversal. Head and shoulders top. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Traders would sell below this bar. A micro double top, so a second entry short. Maybe sell below that bar. However, we got a bull breakout. The top failed. Whenever you have a major top failing, you have to look for two legs up. One pull back two. This breakout is strong enough to make traders expect that we'll get at least one more leg up. When you have any kind of a top, 60% of major tops fail. 40% fail very quickly as soon as the top forms. When it does, you look for some kind of measured move up and for two legs. One pull back two. We have a trading range and a breakout. Whenever there's a breakout, always look for a measured move. A reasonable starting point is the height of the most recent bull leg. And you can see what happened when it got up to that target. The bulls took profits and bear scalpers probably sold as well. The lower high major trend reversal, the head and shoulders top. It failed when the market went above the lower high. That's where the bears have their stop, just above this lower high. And it's where bulls will buy as well. They know that if the bears get stopped out, we'll probably get a couple legs up. So bulls will buy exactly where the bears are getting stopped out, just above this high. We have a resumption of the bull trend. You have to start the process over again if you're looking for a reversal. You need another break below a trend line, another resumption of the bull trend, and then another failure around the prior high. We have a bear trend. Strong break above the bear channel. And several gap bars usually leads to an attempt at a major trend reversal after the bear trend resumes. Head and shoulders bottom, high or low major trend reversal. Bulls buy above this bar. They put a stop just below its low. Again, most major trend reversals do not lead to a reversal into an opposite trend. They usually lead to a trading range or a resumption of the bear trend. The bulls who bought this reversal put their stop just below this low. And they'll get stopped out here. The bears know the bulls will do that. They know the bulls will give up. And a lot of bears will look to go short on a stop just below this low, exactly where the bulls are getting stopped out. And traders will look for two legs down. Here we've got several legs down. Minimum goal is some kind of a measured move. A good starting point is maybe the top of the most recent bear leg. And then the breakout here and look for a measured move down. We fell for more than that. It fell below the higher low, so the bulls got stopped out. And bears shorted as well. We have another attempt at a bottom. Maybe a double bottom, major trend reversal. But this high failed around this breakout point. This rally is probably simply a test of that breakout point. Maybe the measured move instead of from this low will be from the height of the entire pattern. And you can see there was some buying down here around that measured move target. So some bulls were buying for scalps and some bears were taking profits or partial profits. The bear trend resumed. If you're looking for a reversal, you have to start the process over again. You need another break above the trend line. And then a resumption of the bear trend. And you look for the resumption of the bear trend to fail around the prior low. And then for another reversal up. We have pretty good buying pressure in this sell-off. A lot of overlap. A lack of consecutive big bear trend bars. A lot of reversals. And bull bar here. Bull bar here. Bull bar here. A second entry buy here. This is a higher probability trade for at least a couple legs up. One pull back two. Or one pull back two. This is a good buy. This is a good buy as well. If you want, you can call it a triangle. Three pushes down. One. Two. Three. And buy the bull breakout of the triangle. We're trying to get a double bottom major trend reversal here. We have a bear trend. A bull breakout. Maybe a gap bar here. The next leg down might be the end of the bear trend. Very tight channel. Might be simply a minor reversal. But now we have a small double bottom. And a bigger double bottom. This is a reasonable buy. This is a reasonable buy as well. A pretty good first leg up. Bulls probably put their stop below that low. However, they would be concerned that we're getting a reversal down. And then a second reversal down. And an expanding triangle. One, two, three. One, two. So the bulls are concerned that this might fail. Bulls would either get out below that bear bar. If it started up again, they'd buy again. Or they'd put a stop below this low or that low. And you can see we broke below. Big bear breakout. Probably at least a couple legs down. One pull back two. Or one pull back two. In any case, it's a failed bottom. The bear trend is resuming. And you've got to start the process of looking for a bottom over again. Bears will sell. They'll sell below this low or below that low. And the bulls will give up below that low. Start the process over again. Bear trend. Draw a trend line there. Or simply draw a trend line here. And then we've got a bull breakout. Very good bull bar. An additional good bull bar. And then a small triangle for a higher low. Small, higher, low. Major trend reversal. Very good bull breakout. Decent bull bar here. Buy on a stop above that high. Minimum goal is two legs up. One pull back two. And ten bars up. So we've got ten bars and two legs. Minimum goal. This breakout is so strong. Probably at least a little bit more up. We've got a little bit more up here. But now the bears are thinking maybe a double top major trend reversal. Bull trend. Bear breakout. Double top. Slightly higher high. And bears might sell here. And it broke below the neckline of this double top. But the bear breakout failed. And the bulls will look to buy a resumption up. An ABC pullback. A pullback. A pullback. B. A big high two. One pullback. Two. Does not matter that the pullback from the first leg down went above the top of the bull trend. And the top of the first leg down. And the top of the first leg down. Traders will look at this as a failed bear reversal attempt. Tried to reverse down here. Double top. Major trend reversal. Tried to reverse down a second time. And failed. Bulls will buy above here or above here. Doing this entire thing as a bull flag from this very strong rally. The bulls who bought the major trend reversal look for two legs up at a minimum. One, two. They get three, four. Sometimes you get many legs up. I began by talking about major trend reversal bottoms. Leading to 10 bars and two legs up as a minimum goal. The bulls get their goal of a swing trade up about 40% of the time. But the reward is often many times bigger than the risk. And therefore the trader's equation is good. I then talked about head and shoulders reversal patterns. Every head and shoulders top has a lower high major trend reversal. And often the head is a lower low major trend reversal. And the head often is a higher high major trend reversal. Every head and shoulders bottom has a higher low major trend reversal. And often the head is a lower low major trend reversal. Finally, I talked about failed major trend reversal patterns. If the stop gets hit and the breakout beyond the stop is strong, traders will cover and opposite traders will look for a couple legs in a resumption of the original trend. The reversal pattern is failing. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on major trend reversals. The gold curve continues to kill most.