 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth of seven videos on protective stops. There are many different ways to choose a protective stop. An important one is one based upon a measured move or other support and resistance. Whenever there's a small signal bar, if you put your stop just beyond that bar, your risk is small. However, whenever you have excellent risk reward, for example, when you have a very small risk, the probability of profit is very small as well. It's usually better to use at least a slightly bigger stop. Different ways to view this as a wedge. 1, 2, 3, or 1, 2, 3, or 1, 2, 3. It's reasonable to take the sell. A lot of reversals, a lot of two-sided trading. And when above this high, they sold. When above this high, they sold. Above this high, they sold. Above this high, they sold. Above this high, they sold. Above this high, well, they'll probably sell, especially given that there are multiple ways to draw a wedge. It's reasonable to take the short, selling below the low of this bar, and you get filled right here. A series of biclimaxes here, here, here, here, here, here, here, and again here. Usually that results in a reversal at some point, and now that we have a nested wedge, this is a reasonable location to bet that the marker will begin to reverse. Strong breakout, probably will get at least a second leg up. Well, this qualifies as the second leg up. When I see a wedge, 1, 2, 3, I want to see the pullbacks drop below the breakout point. I want to see a stairs pattern. I do not want to see gaps staying open. If I see gaps staying open, the market's probably going to continue higher. But if the pullbacks drop below the breakout point, that's a stairs pattern. That means that the bull trend will probably soon be replaced either by a trading range or a bear trend. If you take the sell below this bar, you could put a stop just above its high. Or you could argue that the market went this high above this breakout point. Here's that same distance. It probably will not go further if it breaks out above this high. And therefore, you look at how high this is above that. You create a box here. You make the same box here. And you put a stop just above that. A measured move based upon the height of the last stair. Betting that this stair will be no bigger than that stair. And that the bull trend will weaken over time. Strong rally. We tried to reverse. Tried to reverse a second time. Tried to reverse a third and fourth time. And the reversals are failing. Bulls will look to buy a reversal up. It's a wedge bull flag. Plus, we have a gap here in this low. Possibly a measured move up. Traders will buy above the high of the prior bar. We have a breakout and a pullback. This would be another buy above the high of that bar. You get in right there. If you want, you can draw it this way. As a triangle. Three pushes down. One. Pullback. Two. Pullback. Three. Triangle bull flag. We have a big breakout. We're trying to reverse up repeatedly. This is a potential measuring gap. The gap between this low and that high. The breakout point. If the premise that this is a bull trend is valid, the market at this point, once you enter here or here, it should not close this gap until after it gets up to this high. Therefore, it's reasonable if you buy above this bar, get filled here, above this bar, get filled here, to put your stop below the bottom of the gap. If you want, you want to go to the bottom of the gap. If you want to go to the bottom of the gap, you want to go to the bottom of the gap. Here's the bottom of the gap. And stop just a little bit below. And this is what I can do. If the premise that this is a bull trend is valid, the market at this point, once you enter here or here, it should not close this gap until after it gets up to this high. Therefore, it's reasonable if you buy above this bar, get filled here, above this bar, get filled here, to put your stop below the bottom of the gap. Here's the bottom of the gap. and stop just a little bit below. Whenever there's a strong bull trend, bulls like to buy a 50% pullback. This is a strong bull trend, reasonably strong bull trend. And this is a 50% pullback. Some traders know bulls will buy here if it falls much below there, bulls will conclude it's not a strong bull trend. It's either a trading range, maybe even a bear trend. A strong breakout here. Here's the 50% pullback. Let's say you bought at the absolute worst price right here. The bull trend is strong. Probably the worst the bears will get is a trading range instead of a bear trend after such a strong rally. And the same is true here. The reversal probably will be minor, either a bull flag or a trading range. In this case, it did reverse into a trading range. A trading range means that if it does fall even below 50%, it probably will not fall below the low before it gets back up to the high. Because of that, some traders will put their stop just below a 50% pullback. Here's the rally. Here's a 50% pullback. Some traders will put their stop just below the low of the 50% pullback. Here, a 50% pullback, the bottom of the trend, the top of the trend. Even if you bought at this high tick, you could reasonably put your stop below a 50% pullback. Better to put it down below the bottom of the bull leg. But if you put it at the 50% pullback and you get stopped out here, you can always buy on a reversal back up either above here, above this bull bar closing on its high, above this bull bar closing on its high. If you get stopped out in the market again, reverses in your direction, you can buy again. You can call this a triple bottom, a head and shoulders bottom, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. You can call it a wedge, even though this did not fall below that. In any case, the bears three times tried to get a swing down and they failed and the market's reversing up and it has a decent bicycle bar here. It's reasonable to buy above this bar and you get filled on this bar. If you're lucky and we break above the top of the double top, the market will probably rally to a measured move up, which turns out is at the top of this bare leg. If you buy, you might want to use a wider stop thinking that, well, if you bought here, it fell below that low. If you buy here, it fell below this low. Maybe if you buy here, maybe it'll get another small leg or two down. But it should not fall for a measured move down if your premise of a rally coming soon is valid. If it does fall below this low, then probably the market's in a continued bear trend and your thought that it's going to reverse is wrong. And therefore it's reasonable to put a stop down here because if it falls below that measured move target, your belief is wrong and you should be no longer holding a long trade. If it does fall down here and starts to reverse up, is that a bad thing to do? No. Most of the bears who do use a wide stop like this or like this are never going to let the stop be hit. If there's a strong bear breakout with good follow through, they'll get out on the close of the follow through bar well above their stop. This stop is a catastrophic stop. If you lose power, if an emergency happens and you have to leave, if there's a problem with your broker, a problem with your software, anything, the wide stop will contain your losses but give you time to have the trade go in your direction. So, here's a five minute chart and here's the 60 minute version of this entire five minute chart. These bars are exactly these bars, the 60 minute chart, the five minute chart. We have a wedge top, one, two, three. Also, you can call it a bigger wedge, one, two, three. A decent sell signal bar. Reasonable to take that short, betting on the double top in a trading range. Again, different ways to draw the wedge top, different computers see it differently. Another way to draw it, but reasonable to sell here, reasonable to sell there. Some traders who take this short are not confident that it's the final top, but they are confident that if it's not, the market will top out pretty soon. They sold above this bar and made money. They sold above here and went down, above here and went down, above here, it probably will go down again. And a lot of the bears who took this sell want to allow for the possibility that it might go above the high, but immediately reverse down. They'll use a measured move, for example, for their stop. We have a double bottom bull flag, a neckline. Here's the measured move up. So they might put a stop just a little bit above that. Again, they're never going to let that stop be hit or they'll rarely ever let it be hit. However, if it does hit that stop, they know their premise is wrong and they should be out and they should take the loss. They're using the wide stop because they're confident that the premise is right. If they do sell here and it goes above the high of this bar, they're confident that there'll be sellers there and the market will eventually go down and they don't want to sell here and get stopped out and then miss the trade. This red box is exactly this red box. If you were looking at the 60 minute chart when you took this short, you would be shorting right here. You can think of a wide stop like here as an ordinary stop on the 60 minute chart. On the 60 minute chart, if you were to sell below the low of the spare bar, reversal down three pushes up, you'd be filled right here. And that would be here on the five minute chart. This price on the 60 minute chart, if you took that short on the 60 minute chart below the spare reversal, and then you looked at the five minute chart, this is where you'd be filled. If you took that short, you would put your stop above the top of the bear trend, just above this high. Had you looked at the five minute chart, your stop would have been here at the top of the sell-off. And that's reasonable. It's a tight bear channel. Probably the first reversal up, bears will sell it. Bulls will sell it as well. The bulls who buy will be buying only for a scalp. The bulls who were long will use any rally to get out with a smaller loss. Therefore, the stop should not be hit on the first reversal up. I think it's important to realize that if you have a small signal bar and you put a stop just beyond it, your risk is small. But whenever you have small risk, you're probably going to lose money. You have a small probability of success. And therefore, a very tight stop is rarely ever a good thing to use. Here we have a bull trend and we have another breakout to a new high. This is a reasonable high one buy. However, let's say the signal bar is only three pips tall or three ticks tall. If you put your stop just below it, then you're risking about five pips or five ticks. You buy one tick above, one pip above. Your stop is one tick or one pip below. Your risk is five ticks or five pips. And that's small, especially compared to the size of the leg before it. Whenever you have a very small stop, that means you have excellent risk reward, small risk, big reward. It also means that you have low probability. If you have a low probability of success, you have a high probability of losing money. It's rarely ever a good idea to put your stop below the bottom of a very small signal bar. Instead, it's better to look to the left, look for the most recent strong rally, and put your stop below the bottom of that most recent strong rally. If it's a bull trend, it should not fall here before going up far enough to make a profit. There are many different alternatives for a wider stop. The point is, if you have a very small signal bar, do not use the low of the bar for your stop because the risk is too small. That automatically tells you that the probability of making money is low. In other words, you'll probably lose money. Some traders will use the appropriate stop. They'll buy here, trade small. And then when you get a second entry, they'll buy more here or above this bull bar. Using that wide stop allows them to buy more if they want to buy more. It also allows the market to go a little bit further against them. They can hold on to the position, and then the trade ultimately is profitable. We have a trading range and a breakout, possibly a failed breakout. Some traders will sell the reversal down below that bar, that inside bar. They'll sell on a stop below its low, and they'll get filled right here. Let's say the bar is 3 pips tall. Then if you sell one pip below, your stop is one pip above. Your risk is 5 pips, very small. Why will you probably lose money? If your risk is small, your risk reward ratio is excellent. And whenever you have an excellent risk reward ratio, you have low probability of making money. That means that most of the time you'll get stopped out and you'll lose money. Whenever you have a very small sell signal bar like this, it's a mistake to put your stop just above the high of the bar. You need a wider stop to improve your probability. You could use a money stop like 10 or 20 pips above, or you could use a stop based upon a measured move. The key is to trade small, and you can always add on if the market goes your way. The market went above the high of the sell signal bar, and then it started to reverse down again. Maybe a wedge, higher high, major trend reversal. Some bears are sold here, used the wide stop, did not get stopped out, might sell more here, betting on a second entry short. A failed breakout above a trading range. That is a higher probability short than is this. Second entry trades are usually higher probability. Strong bull breakout. It's a high one bull flag. It's a small buy signal bar. Probably better not to put a stop just below its low, although it would not get hit here. Instead, put your stop below the bottom of the most recent strong bull breakout. A wider stop means higher probability of success. A wider stop is greater risk. Greater risk means worse risk reward. Bad risk reward means higher probability of success. Too small a stop, the risk is too small. The probability of winning is too small. The probability of winning is too small. The probability of winning is too small. This is a daily chart. If you don't want to trade small positions on the daily chart, one alternative is to use options to express your opinion. Let's say you look at the chart at this point and you say, wow, that's a pretty good bear breakout. Very tight channel, probably going lower. And you look at the chart and say, wow, this is a daily chart. My stop is up here 15 days higher. That's just too much to risk. Instead of selling here and putting your stop up there, an alternative is to buy puts or buy a put spread. I talk about this more in the videos on options trading. If this were a stock, traders would call that a stock replacement strategy. For example, let's say you're short the stock and now your stop is very far away and you want to stay short. You believe the market's going lower, but you do not want that much risk. An alternative is to buy back your short so that you're flat and then go ahead and replace your short position with either long puts or a put spread. So you buy puts or you buy a put spread. Your risk is contained and smaller and you're still able to hold on for a swing down if the swing down continues. What about something more complicated? Some other complicated option strategy? Not worth it. 90% of the time trading simply a call or a put or a call spread or a put spread is a very good choice. We've got a pretty good bull trend here. And therefore you can buy for any reason. You could buy below a bar betting the reversal will fail. You can buy above a bar, a high two buy. We've got a breakout of a high two bull flag, a pullback, a breakout of the pullback. And then here another breakout of a small bull flag. It doesn't matter why you buy. Here we have a pullback that did not fall below this high. We have the potential for a measure move up from down here or here to this gap up here. If you're trading, if you're buying for any reason in here, the important thing to do is use a reasonable stop. You don't want it to be too small because as I said, small stop means small risk. Small risk means you'll probably lose money. It's a low probability of success. And should you use a stop all the way down here if you buy here? Well, that could be much bigger than what you're comfortable risking. That could be unreasonable as well. You're always making trade-offs among the variables in the trader's equation. When you have a strong breakout like this or like this, the probability is high that the market's going higher. Whenever the probability is high, you always are going to have a bad risk reward ratio. That usually means that the stop is far away. If you buy here, the stop is far away. And you're buying late and therefore there's less reward remaining in the trade. High probability buying a strong breakout like this usually means bad risk reward. That's the trade-off. Whenever you're taking a trade, because it has high probability, you pay for that high probability with bad risk reward. Let's say you bought anywhere in here. One choice would be putting a stop below the bottom of the gap, betting that the gap will remain open. Obviously, the best stop is here. But for some traders, that's too much to risk. And therefore, they need a tighter stop. One choice is right below the high of the breakout bar, betting that maybe we'll get a measured move up. You could also put your stop below the low of this breakout bar, or even below the low of this bar. I would not put it below this bar. It's so close to the bottom of the bull trend. I would instead put it here instead of here. But these are other reasonable choices. You could put your stop all the way down at the bottom of the bull trend down here or here. However, after 50 or 60 bars rallying, most traders would not use a stop that wide. They would use a tighter stop. Beginners often make the mistake of pretending that the risk they're exposing themselves to is really not as risky as they think. For example, let's say you buy a high one bull flag or a high two bull flag here. And you put your stop below the bottom of the bull trend. That is an appropriate location for the stop. If you're a beginner, you take that trade and you put your stop down here, knowing it's the right place for the stop. Most beginners will panic and say, oh my gosh, I never thought it would get down here. I really did not intend to risk that much. They knew it was the right place for the stop, but they never were willing to hold onto their positions and rely on that stop. Whenever you're entering late in a trend far above the most reasonable stop, your risk is great and you have to trade small because you have to remain within your comfort zone and you have to make sure that you are not risking any more on this trade than you would on any other trade. There's always a possibility that before we get a second leg up, we'll get a very deep pullback. And instead of this being the start of a bull trend, it might be a bull leg and what would end up being a trading range. If you buy up here for any reason, the correct stop is down here. If it falls below this low, your premise of a bull trend is probably not valid. However, instead of a bull trend, it could be a trading range and fall very far down, not hit your stop. And if that's true and it is a trading range, it'll probably come back up to your original entry price. Had you bought here and you bought more, maybe above a bull bar here, you could hold on for the market to come back to your entry price, get out break even on your first entry and with a profit on your lower entry. The point is, whenever you take a trade and you see the obvious stop, you rely on that stop. If you cannot risk that much, do not take the trade. Even though the market pulled back very deeply, I think most traders would see it as still always in long. We had a pair of bear bars here, but possibly a wedge bull flag, bear channel bull flag. For the rest of it, it never had consecutive big bear trend bars. And therefore, it's probably still a bull flag. It's probably a bear leg in a trading range and not the start of a bear trend. If it's a trading range and it sells off, it probably will rally again and get back up to the top of the range. Many traders who bought here, if they see three bear bars closing below their midpoints or on their lows, will just exit. And that's reasonable. And then they can buy again on a reversal up. It's okay to hold on, betting that the market will not fall below the bottom of the bull trend, and you can add on lower. A lot of bulls will exit. And when the bears see three consecutive bear bars closing on or near their lows, they'll sell. Here's a high one buy. Three bars down, a pullback. Three bear bars, probably sellers above. So traders will sell this close and they'll sell at the high of this bar. Betting that it's a bad buy signal and therefore probably sellers above and at least a small second leg down. Betting that it's a good one. We have a spike down, a breakout, and then three pushes down. One, two, three, or four. It's a spike in channel, wedge, bottom. Most importantly, it's a higher low. It never clearly became always in short. If you relied on your stock and managed your trade correctly, you could buy again on the reversal up above this bull bar or this bull bar or this bull bar, get filled here, and the market will come back to your original entry price. You get out break even on your first entry and with a profit on your lower entry. Sometimes when you have a wide stop, it's going to get hit. Even if the stop makes really good sense, it's still going to get hit. You have to trade small enough so that if the stock does get hit, you do not lose any more on that trade than you do on any other trade. For example, we have a bear trend and a low one bear flag, maybe a low two bear flag. This is a breakout potential gap and measure move up. It's not a terrible short. It's an okay short. This certainly is an okay short. If you want, you can call it a low one or a low two. A micro double top, you can call it a low two selling below that bar. You get filled here. And let's say you put a stop above the top of this sell climax or above the top of the entire bear trend. Either one is reasonable. And then we've got this huge bull breakout. Whether you put your stop above the top of the final bear sell climax or the entire bear trend, your stop got hit. And that's going to happen. In general, a stop is going to get hit on about 40% of trades until you become experienced. Traders who did put their stop above the top of the bear trend got stopped out over here. But if you trade small enough so that if you get stopped out, you do not lose any more on this trade than you do on any other trade, it's basically erasing your last positive winning trade and not you'll last 10 positive winning trades. I talked about how measured move targets can be useful in determining where a reasonable stop should be. And that's true for other support and resistance as well. Also, sometimes you'll have a reasonable setup and the signal bar is very small. It's usually a mistake to put the stop just beyond the signal bar. Small signal bars fail too often. The market goes beyond the signal bar and then again resumes in your intended direction. It's usually better to use at least a slightly wider stop. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth of seven videos on protective stops. seven is alltså. Three is already the seventh of seven for wherever the key I read a lot in school. I have been outlined in the church, if you see you're isolated in the front of the battle. The І liven자 và những rồi hastenar tr�seat cho kне ng k ней không nhất comments.