 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on double tops and bottoms. I want to begin by talking about how a double top is a test of resistance, a prior high, and a double bottom is a test of support, a prior low. I'll then talk about failure of reversal, a failed double top where the market keeps going higher, or a failed double bottom where the market keeps going lower. And finally, I'll talk about measured moves based upon double tops and double bottoms. Whenever the market does something, it usually has to test what it has done before it decides what to do next. For example, if it's selling off and reverses up, the reversal is usually minor unless this first attests back down to the original low. Very strong bear trend. The first reversal up is probably minor. The bear trend resumed. The entire pattern is small. This is probably a minor reversal, yet it's still a double bottom. What takes place here is you have bears selling all the way down. Whenever the market's in a strong trend, a breakout, or a very tight channel, the odds are it's going lower. And the odds are the first reversal up will be minor and the market will have to come back down and test those lows. The bear trend may continue down or the bears may decide that the rally was so strong that it's no longer a bear trend. Instead, it might be a bull trend or a trading range. The bears were selling all the way down. They're disappointed by this bar. We got a reversal up. Some of the bears sold more here. And when they see these two strong bull bars and three consecutive bull bars, they decide that maybe the market is going to pull back more. The bears who sold the absolute worst price, this close or that low, then decide that if it gets near their original price, they'll buy back their shorts. And that's what took place here. And you can see the bears gave up and the market rallied. Yet, as strong as this rally is, it's the first reversal up after a strong bear trend. When that's the case, usually the reversal is minor and the best the bulls get is either a trading range or a bear flag and a resumption of the bear trend. Nobody knows at this point. The bears finally got a chance to resume their trend. But big bear bar, tail, bad follow through, a couple bear bars with tails, and then a bear doji bar. The bulls tried to reverse up going above that high. It looks like the bears do not have a lot of conviction. There are some bears who sold down here this low or even that low, and they did not get out over here because they believed the reversal up was minor. And it may be brief and the bear trend might continue down within a few bars. They did not want to get out and then worry about how to get back in. So they hold short stop way up here. The probability is high. Whenever you sell in a strong bear trend, the probability is high that you're going to make money. But the risk reward is bad. The stop is far away. The bears who did sell this low or that low, if they used a stop up here, did not get stopped out. And they were able to get out around break even with a profit if they scaled in. If they sold this low and they saw the reversal up, and then they sold more below a bear bar below this bar, and then get out around the original entry price. They made a profit on the second entry and get out around break even, maybe a small loss on the first entry. Maybe they buy above this reversal up. To take that trade, their risk was great. But by having a bad risk reward ratio, they got high probability of making a profit or at least avoiding a loss. What traders want to see on the reversal back down is what will happen. Is the reversal down going to be very strong? And will it look like a resumption of the bear trend? Or will it be weak and try to reverse up once or even twice at the prior low? The market's testing the prior low. Here, it reversed up. For the bulls to get their reversal, they need a major higher low. They need a pattern that has 10, 20 or more bars. And that's what they have here. This is the potential for a major trend reversal on the test of this low. We don't know yet. Ultimately, it did lead to a reversal of the trend. When the market got down to this price level, the bulls bought. It got down to it again here. They bought again. The bears saw the buying here and they saw the buying here. But they believed the reversal up was minor because it's the first reversal in the strong bear trend. However, they paid a lot of attention to the next leg down. They saw this. All traders saw the sell off as a test of this price level. Would traders buy again and form a major reversal up? Either a trading range or a bull trend? Or would the bears break through that level and start a new leg down? You can see they reversed up. Second entry buy. First entry above a bear bar after six or seven bear bars. Most traders will not take that. Now they have a second entry buy at the bottom of a trading range or possibly a major trend reversal. And then they have a bull bar here closing above its midpoint. They will buy above that bar. The bears will get out and the bulls will buy. It's a double bottom, slightly higher low, major trend reversal. Here's a small double bottom. Traders bought here. The market tried to resume down. And every time it gets to the prior low, it's a test of that low. Will it reverse up again? It did. Again, we're back down to that level where bulls bought before. Will the bears break through that level? Or will the bulls buy again? This is a test of the prior low. And it formed a double bottom. Another test of the low. Test of this low and a test of this low. And again, the bulls bought strongly. This time even more strongly than the other times. Very big tail on the bottom of this bar. Very big bar. This is a double bottom. A test of the prior low to see if bulls would again buy at that price. It confirms this level as support. It's a double bottom with this low. It broke below the entire trading range and reversed up violently. A lower low major trend reversal. Below this low and below that low. After a strong reversal up. Minor reversal. The next leg down led to a major reversal attempt. It failed. And then we have a new breakout. Again, a test of this low and the bottom of the trading range. And it reversed up even more strongly. Another major trend reversal. It's confirming this area as an important support level. The bulls are overwhelming the bears at this price. The market is repeatedly trying to break below this level and failing. And usually when it does something many, many times and fails, it then usually tries the opposite direction. It concludes that it cannot get through this level. And this level therefore is probably too low. Next, it has to find a price that's too high. Another test down. Will it break below this low? No. The bulls came in again, forming another double bottom. The bears are losing conviction. Instead of selling at new lows, they're selling rallies. But they're taking profits near the prior low. They're not confident that the bear trend will continue. They're thinking that the bear trend has been replaced by a trading range. And once it's in a trading range, then bulls can try to get a major trend reversal. And the bulls are buying every sell-off, confident that the bulls made money buying here earlier. And again here, they continue to buy there, confident that they'll make money, hoping that they'll make a lot of money. We have a bull trend and then a bear trend. The market turned down here. Fairly strongly. It broke below the bull trend line, the bull channel. The bulls resumed. And look what happened when it got to this price level. It sold off again. And then it got back there again and it sold off again. This is an important price level. It's resistance. The market is having a hard time going above this price. And this is confirming the area as resistance. And this is confirming it again. Bulls are buying at every instant on the way up, even at the high of this bar. Confident the first reversal down will be minor and the market will come back up to this level. And they'll be able to get out at least break even. This rally made them whole. The bull who bought the worst price way up here is now whole. And he's probably relieved that he can sell out of his lung at break even. When he sees the sell-off, he probably concludes the bull trend is weaker. Maybe the market's in a trading range. And if it's in a trading range, he does not want to be long at the top. He uses the test of the prior high, the test of his entry price, to get out. He sells. Other bulls see this strong reversal down. They know it's minor. However, it's a sign that the bears are strong. They're concerned that the bears may be strong again when it gets up to that level. And the bulls will sell out of their lungs. And the bears will sell and take a chance that instead of simply a minor reversal, now we'll get a double top and possibly a major trend reversal. A double top. Does not matter that it's a slightly higher high. In this particular case, this double top is also an expanding triangle. We went up here, turned down, turned down higher and higher, and we have a lower low. And therefore, it's a double top. And it's also a higher high major trend reversal. Every expanding triangle top is a higher high major trend reversal. Even without the expanding triangle, it's still a major reversal. We had a very strong minor reversal, followed by a test of the high. And the market found sellers again. This is a double top. It's a higher high major trend reversal. And then we have a slightly lower high, a lower high major trend reversal. The markets are constantly looking for confirmation. It sold off strongly from this level. What will happen if it gets up there again? Will it sell off again? And it did. It increases the probability that you'll get a reversal, or at least an end of the bull trend and a conversion into a trading range. Higher high major trend reversal. Probably at least 10 bars, two legs down. Leg one, pull back leg two. Here we got far more than 10 bars down. And we have far more than two legs. One, two, three, four, five. Strong selling at the new high. The bulls are giving up. You can see they gave up here. And the bears see the bulls giving up. And they're selling as well. Micro double top, up, down. A little bit up, down. Traders will sell below this bull bar. The neckline of this micro double top. And then we have a double top bear flag here. This is also a lower high major trend reversal. Below two, low one, low two. Traders will sell below the low of this bar. Taking a chance that we're going to get a swing down. The bull trend needs higher highs. And more importantly, the bull trend needs higher lows. Especially major higher lows. A major higher low is a higher low that results in a strong rally. Usually to a new high. This is more or less a minor higher low. It has a new rally. But the bars are not all that big. There's not much buying here. This is also a minor higher low. This is a major higher low. The bears tried to reverse strongly. The bulls reversed back up even stronger. And got a new high. As long as the market is staying above this low, the bulls will assume the bull trend is intact. But once it falls below that low, bulls and bears will conclude that the bull trend has ended. The market then has either evolved into a trading range or into a bear trend. We have a double top. This is the neckline of the double top. If the market falls below this low, the bears will assume that the bull trend has ended. And maybe they'll get a swing down. This is a strong rally to a new high. So it's a very important higher low. And it's also the neckline of this double top. And you can see we have a breakout and a follow-through bar. Probably going to fall for about a measured move. The bull trend tried to resume. It tested the breakout point a little bit above the breakout point. And then reversed down again. That's common. To get a breakout below a key support level. The support becomes resistance. The market tests it. And then resumes back down. These two bars represent the bulls giving up. They're disappointed. And they exited. And they'll wait to buy again lower. And the bears know that. The bears know the bulls will give up below such a strong rally. And the bears will sell below the neckline of this double top. It's a major higher low. And then here the bull trend is trying to resume. The bears expect at least a second leg down after a two bar bear breakout. They'll sell below this bar or below that bear bar. And now we broke above the resistance level, the neckline of the double top. Bears assume the reversal up will fail. And they'll look to sell. Either below this bear bar. We have a double top here. Or below this micro double top. Three consecutive bull bars. A lot of bears prefer to take a second entry short. So instead of selling below this bear bar, they'll sell below this bear bar. It's a second entry short. Double top. Test of the neckline. And traders look for a measured move down. We have a double top. The measured move might be based upon the lower of the two highs and then the neckline. Or it could even be the higher of the two highs. Traders will first look at the nearer support level. The measured move based upon the lower high. If it falls below that level, they'll then look at a measured move based upon the higher of the two highs and see what the market does there. And you can see, I don't have it drawn in, but this is about the measured move based upon the higher of the two highs. A bear trend needs lower lows. More importantly, it needs lower highs. Lower major highs. A major high is a high that has a strong sell-off, preferably to a new low. As long as the market's forming major lower highs, it's in a bear trend. If it goes above a major lower high here, maybe here, the bear trend probably has ended. And the market has either evolved into a trading range or reversed into a bull trend. We tried to sell off, a fairly decent sell-off, yet we double bottomed here. Slightly lower low double bottom. We tried to reverse up, it failed. We tried to reverse up a second time. And we got four consecutive bull bars closing above their midpoints and closing above the neckline of this double bottom. That means most traders conclude that the bear trend has ended. And the market has either evolved into a trading range or into a bull swing or a bull trend. The bears are clearly disappointed. More and more bears are giving up here. And by the end of this bull breakout, bears are definitely disappointed. They expect higher prices. So they'll exit, exit for any reason. They were exiting all the way up. They were giving up during this four bar rally. And they'll wait to sell higher. Maybe here, maybe here. The bulls see the strong rally. And they see the market breaking above the neckline of the double bottom. The bulls will buy on a stop just above this high, expecting a measured move up. And at least two legs up. One pull back two. Or one pull back two. Minimum target, a measured move based upon the height of the double bottom. This low slightly below that low. And the market broke strongly above that high. Went up to the top of the bear trend. A wedge sell off, three pushes down. Spike, pull back. Second push, pull back. Third or fourth push down. One, two, three. And it's a breakout test. A test of the breakout above the neckline of the double bottom. Good support level. It was resistance. The bulls broke above it. It's support here. And it's support again here. So now we have a double bottom. Bull flag. Bull trend. Pull back. To a double bottom. Bulls will buy the reversal up. Especially since it's a wedge double bottom with this low. The market's in a trading range. We have a bull trend and a trading range. We could get trend reversal down. The bears see a double top. We could get trend resumption up. The bulls see a bear channel, bull flag, and then a breakout, and then a pull back to a double bottom. They expect the bull trend to resume up. Anytime the market goes sideways for 20 or more bars, I stop using the term pullback, and I begin to use the term trading range. A pullback is a small trading range where you assume the trend will continue. Once the pullback grows to 20 or more bars, I use the term trading range. And when I say that, I mean the probability for trend resumption up is about the same as the probability for trend reversal down. Bulls and bears are balanced. Whenever the market's in a trading range, it always has both a reasonable buy signal and a reasonable sell signal. For the bears, they have a double top. You can call it a slightly lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout, testing the old high, and trying to reverse down. And a micro double top, up, pull back, up again. Maybe a little triangle. It's a sell signal below that inside bar. However, it did not succeed. For the bulls, they see this as a bull flag with a strong reversal up. They'll buy above this bar, or they'll wait for this wedge bull flag by above here, or they'll buy above this double bottom bull flag. You can also call it a head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, and then right shoulder, where the right shoulder is a double bottom. Every pattern, no matter how good, fails some of the time, and that includes double tops and double bottoms. We have a double top, this high, that high, this high, that high, and this high, and that high. The bears are trying to get a reversal down. The bears who shorted will put their stops above the double top, somewhere over here. Many choices for a neckline, because most of the time, the tops are not exactly at the same level. In any case, this is an obvious neckline. If it breaks above it, the market may rally for a measured move up. The bears expect a double top here and here to fall below the neckline for a measured move down. If it breaks above the double top, traders expect a measured move up. We have a small double bottom here, a bigger double bottom this low and that low. I could also do a measured move based upon this big double top using this neckline for a measured move up. I always look at the nearest target first. This is a trading range within a bigger trading range. If it goes beyond the first target, then I look at higher targets. For example, maybe the market is using this double top neckline for a measured move up. If it goes above that, then I'll look at a double top here and here with this next line, and look at a measured move up there to see what the market does when it gets there. You can see here we have a double top at that measured move, and the market is starting to turn down. A good location for the bulls to take at least partial profits. A bear trend. We try to get a reversal. Minor reversal. We tested the prior low. Traders are looking for a possible double top. First reversal up. Pretty tight channel. Most traders will not buy that. And then we get a second reversal up here or here. They will buy this. But weak entry bar, weak follow through, and then weak follow through all through here. This does not look like it's going to be a successful reversal. And traders therefore will start to wonder if the double bottom will fail and the market will fall for a measured move down. Traders will look to sell on a breakout below the double bottom. And they'll look for a measured move down. They'll sell below that low, looking for a measured move down. We have a pretty good breakout. Probably will get a second leg down. We came up and tested the bottom of the double bottom, the breakout point. And we sold off again. We sold off at this price. We tested that price again. We sold off again. Bears will sell below this bear bar as well, looking for a swing down. They'll sell the breakout just below this low on a stop. And then they'll sell the reversal down. Double tops and double bottoms, whether they fail or succeed, often lead to measured moves. The market rallied strongly. The bears tried to resume the small bear trend. And it rallied up again. We have a double bottom. This is the neckline of the double bottom. If it goes above that neckline, traders will look for a measured move up. And they'll use that measured move target as an area to take profits. Good looking buy signal bar. Two legs down, one pull back two. And a double bottom. Traders will buy on a reversal. They'll buy just above the high of this bull bar and get filled right here. Some traders bought above here and might have held long with a stop below there. Most traders probably would have gotten out below one of these bear bars. And it looks like a lot of traders gave up here. Yet, the market stayed above that low. If traders did exit their longs, they'll buy on the reversal up, betting on a successful double bottom. Here's the measured move. Double bottom, neckline, measured move up. And look what took place there. We reversed down. We reversed down because the bulls who bought for any reason, either here or buying closes or buying a bull flag here or a high two bull flag here. Leg one, pull back leg two. A lot of them have limit orders to take partial profits here. Others will sell on the reversal down. Micro double top. Up, pull back, up again. They'll sell below that bar or maybe sell below these bear bars. Bears know the bulls will take profits. And some bears will sell with limit orders either there or on the reversal down, hoping for at least a scalp down. Double bottom. We have a very deep pullback from this rally, but it held above this low. The bulls see that as bullish. They see this as simply a pullback from this very strong bull breakout. And now we have a double bottom. And they'll buy on the reversal up. And look for a measured move up above this neckline. Here's another chart. We have a double top. We have a neckline of the double top here. And how I look at this is this way. We have a strong bull breakout, similar to this. We have a deep pullback, similar to this. Therefore, theoretically, bulls would try to buy here again for a double bottom. Sometimes, instead of getting the double bottom, we get a strong bear breakout. When that happens, I look at it as an attempt at a double bottom. If I see a strong bull breakout like this, and then a reversal below its low, I view it as an attempted double bottom and a failed double bottom. And I look for a measured move down. Even though there was not much of an attempt at a double bottom. Strong bull breakout. The bulls should have created a double bottom. They could not create anything like a double bottom. If we fall below this low, I'm going to assume that the bulls should have created a double bottom. And I'm going to assume the market will behave as if there was a double bottom. And we broke below its low. I'm looking for a measured move down based upon the height of that bull breakout. To me, this is a bull breakout. An attempt at a double bottom. The attempt failed. We broke to the downside. I'm going to look for a measured move down. We have a double bottom. We reversed up to the neckline, yet did not break above it. And now we have a potential double top. Bulls would buy above the reversal up from the prior low, a double bottom. Bears will sell the reversal down from the prior high, a potential double top. Whenever there's both a double bottom and a double top, the market's in a trading range. And trading ranges often have failed breakouts. In fact, most breakouts fail. We tried to break to the downside. We reversed up. We tried to break to the upside. We reversed down. Bear trend. Bull breakout. Test of the prior low. Slightly above the prior low. So a slightly higher low. Major trend reversal. Not much buying pressure. Very tight range. Not a high probability buy setup. It rallied to that high, but the rally is weak. Reduces the chances we'll get a successful bull breakout. And the bears created a double top. The bulls who bought above here and held long, their stop did not get hit. Three did not fall below that low. Double top here and here. And traders who sold here, if they put their stop here, that also did not get hit. This high did not go above that high. So at this point, the bulls theoretically can be still long and the bears can be short. We have a double bottom with one and five again. You can call it a double bottom with three and five. One and five. Different computers see it differently. Five fell slightly below three. It's hard to see here, but it's closer to the green line here than three is here. Yet five did not fall below one. The bulls are still hoping for a higher low major trend reversal and a measured move up based upon the height of this trading range. We broke to the upside to a new high. The bulls are hoping this is a double bottom, a break above the neckline, which is here or here, same price. And they want a measured move up. Yet we got a reversal down. The bulls got a breakout above a double top. And it's also the neckline of the double bottom created by one and three. So one and three, this is the neckline. We broke above it, yet the breakout failed. Whenever you have a double top and a breakout that fails, you have three pushes up. One plus two for the double top. And the third push up, the failed breakout. To me, that's a type of wedge. Even though it looks nothing like a wedge, the market three times tried to go up and failed three times. And therefore, it functions like a wedge. And you have to assume you'll get some kind of a reversal down. Maybe a couple legs down. One pullback, two. Or tight channel. So one pullback, two. Three strong bear bars, two closing near their lows. Eight bars down. Strong sellers. Probably we're going lower. The bulls tried a bull breakout and failed. And now we're getting an even stronger bear breakout. Chances are it'll be successful. It could be another failed breakout and a reversal up. But after a strong attempt to break to the upside, that failed. And now we have three consecutive bear bars. It looks like eight bars down here. Chances are this reversal up will be simply a pullback from this breakout and a bear flag. And that will go lower. Bears will sell below the bear bar, expecting some kind of a second leg down. In this video, I talked about how a double top is a test of the first top, a test of resistance. A double bottom is a sell-off testing a prior low, a test of support. And that is why the reversals are so often good. The market twice tries to do something and fails. It then tries to go the opposite direction. You get a reversal. All patterns sometimes reverse. And that's true of double tops and bottoms as well. When they do fail, traders look for a measured move. And finally, I talked a little bit about measured moves based upon the height of the double top or the height of the double bottom. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the second of two videos on double tops and bottoms. podcasting cultures. and today Ivasir A, Wow Thank you.