 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fourth of five videos on climaxes. I'm going to begin by talking about consecutive climaxes where you have one climax and then you have another climax before you have a reversal. It's important to remember that every trend bar is a breakout and a climax. A climax does not necessarily mean a reversal. A big bull trend bar, a buy climax. Another buy climax. Another buy climax. Here it's consecutive bull trend bars. And then finally another climax at the top. Ultimately, the market pulled back, went sideways for a long, long time, and then there was a little bit of a reversal. This is a series of buy climaxes. And when they occur with very little pullback after each climax, the market often forms a wedge or a parabolic wedge. Also, it often moves for a measured move. I have a top here and a pullback. And then I have another climax and a small reversal down. And then another reversal down. This is a parabolic wedge at this point. Sometimes you get a fourth push, which you have here. Other computers will say, well, this is such a strong breakout. The market is starting to count over again. So this is the first push, not this. You have a first push, a second push, and a third push. In any case, whenever you see a series of three or more climaxes in a very tight channel, and then you get a reversal attempt, it is a parabolic wedge. A buy climax ends when the next bar is either a bare bar, as it is here, or a small bar here. Here we have a bigger bull bar compared to this, and then another bigger bull bar. I view these two bars as a breakout and therefore a climax. This bar has a big tail on top. So I think of it as not part of the climax. This is the buy climax, and that's the bar that ended the climax. A big bull trend bar here, relatively big. And then you have a bull trend bar here. I would say this is the climax, and that bar means that the climax ended with this bar. Whenever the market's in a channel, even a very tight channel, there's a 75% chance that a bull breakout above a bull channel will lead to a reversal and a test of the bottom of the channel. If I were to draw the bottom of the channel, it would be very tight. It's not much of an accomplishment for the market to go from the top of the channel to the bottom of the channel. Whenever I see a bull channel, I'm assuming 75% chance the market will break below the bottom of the channel. So any bull channel, even a very strong one like this, and a very tight channel, is a bear flag. I say that because I expect a bear breakout 75% of the time. Only 25% of the time will the market break strongly above the top of the channel and then enter another breakout phase. For example, like this, another breakout and then another channel. If you have a bull channel, you're probably going to get a bear breakout and not a new breakout and then another bull channel. The opposite is true for a bear channel. Every bear channel, for example, here's a bear channel. Every bear channel is a bull flag. 75% chance it'll break above the top of the bear channel. There are always bears selling at the prior high. Bears are scaling into shorts. So they'll sell with a limit order at this high or above the high. And the same with here as well. These are, for the most part, weak bears trying to pick a top. They're afraid of losing too much money. And they believe that if they sell at the high, maybe the market will reverse immediately and they'll have very little risk. Whenever a trader takes a trade that has very little risk, he's going to lose money the majority of the time. Anytime you're trying to create a trade with a very low risk, you're trying to create a trade with a very good risk reward ratio. That always has to have a low probability. If you take a low risk trade, you're probably going to lose. And if the risk is too small, the probability of winning is so small, it's not a profitable strategy. You have bears selling here, weak bears, and they're forced to buy. They sell above this bar or above that bar and they're forced to buy back their shorts. Strong bears, on the other hand, might be selling this high as well or that high as well. Probably not this high, but maybe this high when the bars are getting smaller and we've already had two or three buy climaxes. One, two, three. Strong bears will start selling prior highs and they'll scale in, but they're never going to buy back their shorts. They can keep scaling in indefinitely. And therefore, because they're never going to be forced into buying back their shorts, they're never going to get squeezed out and you're not going to get a buy climax due to strong bears buying. When you get a buy climax like this, it's in part due to weak bears buying. Bears selling this high, hoping for a top with very little risk and they have to cover as the market races up. And the same here. Strong bears are not going to buy back their shorts. Eventually what happens is there are no more bears willing to buy back their shorts. All you're left with are the strong bears. And the strong bulls, they bought down here. They're not buying up here. They look at this as a gift. The market rallied very quickly, very far above their entry price, anywhere down in here. And they're going to start taking profits. So the strong bulls are selling. The only buyers left are the weak bulls. The bulls who did not buy this because the stop was too far. And then they finally bought here because the stop is closer and there are not enough weak bulls left to lift the market up. The strong bulls are selling. The market goes down. The strong bears are selling. The market goes down. And that's what happens when you get a series of climaxes. One, two, three, four consecutive buy climaxes. You have to assume the market will soon start to pull back. And the strong bulls who sold here are not looking to buy back on the next bar. They're concerned that it's so climactic there might be a reversal. They'll wait at least five or ten bars before looking to buy again. And if they're not convinced that the swing down has ended, they're not going to buy. And that's what took place here. Seven or eight bear bars, the bulls did not buy. They expect a second leg down. Second leg down, but a bear breakout, they expect more down again. So not much buying for the strong bulls either. Once you run out of trapped bears and the strong bulls stop buying, the market has to go lower to find traders willing to buy. Those strong bulls are only going to buy after they see evidence that the strong bears are taking profits. When you get seven bars down like this, do you think the bears are buying back their shorts? No, they're expecting a second leg down. So they're looking for a rally to sell. The bulls know that. So the bulls are not eager to buy. And the result is very weak buying, very small bars type trading range. Weak bulls are always buying, hoping that they're buying with very little risk. But they do not have enough money to create a significant move. They will not overwhelm the strong bears. In general, whenever you have any significant reversal, here we're talking about consecutive buy climaxes and a parabolic wedge. We're starting to reverse down. A general rule is weight 10 bars and two legs. TBTL, 10 bars and two legs before looking to buy again, because that's pretty much what the strong bulls will do as well. When the first leg down is reasonably strong like this, an eight bar bear micro channel, the strong bulls are not going to buy. You get some weak bulls buying. You have some strong bears taking partial profits and you get a bounce. But the bulls who did not exit during the sell off will exit on the bounce, a 50% pullback. And the bears who did not sell will sell on the bounce as well. And the result is you get at least one more leg down. The strong bulls want to weight at least 10 bars and two legs because that's typically what follows a series of buy climaxes. And if they see 10 bars, at this point they have 10 bars, but they only have one leg, so they're not going to buy. At this point they have two legs down, one pullback two, and far more than 10 bars, they probably have 50 bars. But they have a strong bear breakout. They're also not going to buy here either. At a minimum, they're going to weight 10 bars and two legs in general before they'll think about buying again. After eight bars down like this, the strong bulls believe that the bears will sell more on any bounce, expecting another leg down. On the other hand, if the strong bulls think that the sell off is not very good, and that there's not enough selling by the strong bears, and the market has had a couple legs down, that's not the case here. The bulls will buy, expecting another leg up. We have a bull trend bar, and therefore a buy climax. Here we have a bull trend, and we have a bull trend bar, so that's a buy climax. We have a series of bull trend bars here, another buy climax. Two big bull trend bars, another bull trend bar. We have a series of buy climaxes, and they are in a channel. I can draw a line above, I can draw a line below. A bull channel is a bear flag. 25% chance the bulls will get a breakout above the channel, and then start another market cycle. Bull breakout, and then channel up. 75% chance a bull breakout attempt will fail, and the market will break below the bottom of the channel, at least a little bit. 75% chance the market will break below the channel, either by going down, or by simply going sideways. 25% chance you'll get a bull breakout, and another leg up. If you do get the bull breakout, you have to be thinking about a possible measured move. A bull channel is a bear flag. If you get a bull breakout above the bear flag, you'll probably rally for a measured move up. And that's what we have. We have a bull channel. The market tried to go sideways or down to break below the bottom of the channel. And instead we got this. A big bull breakout and follow through. Probably a measuring gap. This low and that high. Traders will look for a measured move up from here or here to here, up to this general area. Whenever you have a strong breakout, it doesn't matter. A strong breakout of a trading range or a strong breakout above a bull channel. The market cycle begins over again. A breakout and then a channel and then a trading range again. We have a breakout and then a small bar and then another breakout and then a small bar and then another breakout. This is a parabolic wedge top. The market tried to reverse down. We broke out again and we went sideways. We tried to resume up again and it's within a trading range. This is consecutive tops. We have a top attempt here and we have another breakout, another top attempt. And now we have another top attempt. And the result was a trading range. A breakout like this is a low probability event. Whenever something is unlikely to happen, but does happen, both the bulls and the bears are trapped. Both thought the market would go sideways to down. Instead it went up. The bears who were selling prior highs now find themselves in a losing position. And when they see a pair of consecutive bull trend bars like this, they know we're probably rallying for a measured move up. They're hoping for any pullback like this or like this to buy back their shorts to reduce their loss. And because the bears are buying, any small pullback will lead to a rally. A pullback leads to a rally. You'll have bulls who thought this was going to top out, but then they see this and they say, oh, we're going higher. They're going to look at any pullback as an opportunity to buy for at least a small second leg up. They'll buy below this bar. They'll buy above that bar. Second leg up. Here we now have a double bottom bull flag. And they'll buy above this bar or they'll simply buy at that low looking for at least another leg up. Bulls and bears are both buying. The probability is after you have a strong breakout like this, you're going to get a second leg up. This might be a small second leg, pullback, second leg, or pullback, second leg. Consecutive biclimaxes. Here we have four of them. One, two, three, four. It's a type of a wedge top. And now we're getting a bull breakout above a wedge top. Usually if you get a strong bull breakout above a wedge top or above any kind of a bear flag, the market will rally for some kind of a measured move up. Here's the top of the bear flag, the top of the wedge. And this is a measured move. And you can see what happened when the market got there. It pulled back in part because bulls were taking profits, in part because the bears expected bulls to take profits, and the bears started selling as well for a scalp down. Four bull trend bars, a little climax, a little climax here. You can call all of this a buy climax, a small climax here. Every trend bar is a climax. A big bull trend bar, a climax, a trend bar, a climax, a trend bar, a climax. At some point, there's no one left to buy at this price at this time. And the strong bulls will take profits. The strong bears begin to short. Usually after you get a series of consecutive buy climaxes, the market goes sideways. And then it decides whether it will resume up or reverse down. Consecutive buy climaxes. You have to assume at some point you'll get 10 bars, two legs sideways to down. That's the minimum objective. Here's one leg. The bull trend resumed. Second leg. So we have two legs sideways here. You could say the buy climax ended here, and this is one leg down. You don't always get a second leg down. Maybe we will. 20 bar trading range after consecutive buy climaxes. This is a buy climax as well. And this is a small buy climax. But we started to go sideways here. Small bars, doji bars, prominent tails, small bodies. After the market goes sideways for 20 or more bars, this is probably 30 bars. The market's in breakout mode. There's about a 50-50 chance that you'll get a reversal down and a 50-50 chance you'll get trend resumption up. For the bulls, they see a double bottom bull flag. And for the bears, they see a lower high major trend reversal. Or a head and shoulders top. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. The bears do not have consecutive big bear trend bars here or here. They're concerned that they are not able to reverse the market. If enough bears believe that they are unable to turn the market down, they'll start buying back their shorts. At this point, it's still neutral. We still don't know if the bears will give up and the bulls will buy and we'll get trend resumption up. Every trading range has both a buy signal and a sell signal. They're both equally good. In general, there's always a slightly higher probability that the trend will resume. But after you get to 20 or 30 bars, the probability is almost 50-50 for trend resumption up and trend reversal down. After a lot of bars, the bulls start getting confident again and they try hard to get their trend resumption up. At this point, it's still neutral. But you get a bull bar here and a second bull bar here. Traders believe that we're going up. We're going to get trend resumption up. The bears are giving up on these bars, these two bars here, and bulls are buying aggressively. You can see the open of this bar is at or above the close of this bar. The low of this bar barely dipped below the high of this bar. That means bulls are buying aggressively. The same here and the same here. The bears are giving up. These two bars signify the bears giving up. And the bulls are buying aggressively for at least a measured move up based upon the height of the trading range. Now we have an even bigger bi-climax. Here we have a four bull bar bi-climax. It's bigger than this bi-climax or any of these prior bi-climaxes. Whenever you have the biggest bi-climax occurring 20 or more bars into a trend, here it's 100 bars into the trend. Chances are it's going to be an exhaustive end of the trend and not the start of a new even stronger trend. This is probably going to be an exhaustion gap. We have a pullback here. We're going sideways. The gap right now is this low and that high. Probably the gap will close, which it did over here. Usually the market comes all the way down to the bottom of the bi-climax. In this particular case, it simply went sideways. You can draw a channel. We have a reversal down, a reversal down. That allows us to draw a channel. And part of the reason why this went up so quickly is everyone knew it would get to the top of the channel. And everyone knew it would reach a measured move based upon the height of the trading range. So you had two magnets here. The bears bore back their shorts early on, all the way up for that matter. And they did not want to sell again until the market got to resistance, the top of the channel and the measured move target. And the bulls were buying aggressively knowing that bears would not sell. But once it got to the target, the bulls stopped buying. Strong enough breakout. Chances are there'll be at least a small second leg up, but not necessarily more than that. And you can see what happened when the market had that second leg up. The bears sold aggressively above the channel and above the measured move target. And the bulls saw this as a great opportunity to take profits. Bears and bulls sold and we went sideways to down. Strong rally. Probably a second leg up. And we got a second reversal down. First reversal here, this tail. And the second reversal, a big tail and a bare body. A micro double top. Two attempts to break above resistance. Both failed. Probably will get at least 10 bars, two legs sideways to down. Bulls exhausted. They want to wait at least 10 bars and two legs. One leg, pull back, two legs. Before they buy again. Just like here, they were exhausted and they waited. Three reversals down here or here. And then here and here. It's a triangle. Breakout mode. And the bulls got a breakout. But look at this breakout. Does it look like this? No. It's small bars, doji bars. This probably is a bull leg and what will end up in a trading range. So this probably eventually will trade back down here without going much higher. Strongest bull breakout. 20 or more bars into a bull trend. Probably an exhausting gap. This is about 100 bars into a bull trend. We have consecutive buy climaxes all the way up. We also have a wedge top. Three pushes up. A bull breakout above a bull channel. Twice trying to break out. Both times reversing down. This is probably an exhaustion gap. The gap initially is this close and that high. And then this close. And then this close and that high. Then we get a pull back here. The gap now is this low or that low and this high. And eventually the market fell below the breakout point and the gap closed. That means this rally became an exhaustion gap rather than a measuring gap. You had bears selling above bars. They sold above here. They made money. They sold above here and they panicked. They realized that they were selling into a strong breakout. The weak bears bought back their shorts. You had weak bulls who have been waiting, waiting, waiting for confidence that the market was going higher. And they finally buy. They buy at the top. When the weak bears are all gone and they've all bought back their shorts and the weak bulls are finally buying near the top, there's no one left to buy. The strong bulls bought down here. And the strong bears will look at this and say, huh, this is consecutive buy climax. This is right at the top of a channel. We're at a measured move. What a great opportunity to sell, at least for a scalp. The strong bulls are selling to take profits. The strong bears are selling for a scalp. There are no more weak bears left to buy. They've already been stopped out as the market rallied. And the weak bulls, there are not enough of them to make the market go higher. Bulls see this as a gift. Strong breakout, they expect at least a little bit more up. But they also see the location, top of a channel, measured move. As the market's going up, they sell. The strong bulls sell above this high. The weak bulls are buying above this high. And the strong bears are selling above that high as well. And the result was a big reversal bar. And it led to 10 bars down and 20 to 30 bars sideways. Again, the strong bears see the same thing as the bulls. And they see this resistance as a great opportunity to sell, at least for a scalp, maybe for a swing. They know this is more likely an exhaustive end of a trend instead of a breakout and an acceleration into an even stronger trend. Every trend bar, every series of trend bars is a breakout and a climax. We have two bare bars closing on their lows, good size. Sell climax, small sell climax here. Sell climax here, a little bit here, here, here. We have a series of sell climaxes without much pullback. Usually, you run out of traders willing to sell. The weak bulls keep buying, buying, buying, buying, and they're giving up, giving up, giving up. And at some point, they stop buying. And the weak bears, they see the breakout and they say, now's the time to sell. And they keep selling at the lows. They are not enough to keep the trend going down. The strong bulls see the consecutive sell climaxes and they know the odds are the market will soon go up or sideways. For 10 bars and two legs at a minimum. And the strong bears, they sold up here. At some point, they start taking profits at prior lows. And you can see we have a break up below this low, but it pulled back above the low. We have a break up below this low and it pulled back above that breakout point. The strong bears are starting to take profits. They know that when you have a series of consecutive sell climaxes, the market's probably going to go up for at least 10 bars and two legs. And they buy back their shorts, looking to sell higher. If the reversal up is strong enough, they'll keep waiting to sell again. And the strong bulls, they're never going to give up. They're buying these lows. Every new low, they're buying more and more and more, confident that after a series of consecutive sell climaxes, we're going to enter a trading range or get a reversal. A climax ends when there is some kind of a pause bar. Here a doji bar, doji bar. Here a bull bar, bull bar, a bull bar. This is the climax and this bar means that the climax has ended with this bar. Bear channel, I don't have a channel drawn in there, but a bear channel is a bull flag. 25% chance you'll get a new breakout and then a new market cycle down, a breakout and then another channel down. 75% chance you're going to break above the top of the bear channel. A bear channel is a bull flag. A series of sell climaxes often ends with some kind of a wedge, three pushes down. One, two, three, sometimes a parabolic wedge and usually around a measured move. Look to the left. Are there any gaps? We have a breakout here. These pullbacks did not go above that breakout point. This bar might be a measuring gap. Maybe from the start of this bear leg, possibly from the start of the bear trend. But in any case, this bear leg, it led to a measured move down. If it fell below that, then I would look at a measured move based upon the top of the bear trend to this gap. Measuring gap. Three pushes down. Three pushes down. One, two, three. Very big breakout bar. We tried the bottom here and we got a very big breakout. Possibly three pushes down. One, two, three. To a wedge bottom. And a measured move. If the strong bears believe that bulls will only buy lower, the bears will keep selling. They expect another leg down. But they also know eventually the strong bulls will buy and they'll keep buying and never stop buying. The weak bulls keep buying and giving up. They buy, they give up. They buy, they give up. And they are helping drive the market down. Eventually, there will not be enough bulls selling to drive the market down. There will not be enough weak bears left selling. And the strong bears will stop selling and they're only willing to sell higher. And the strong bulls will take over the market. And that's what took place here. You can call this a lower low major trend reversal. We have a bear trend, a weak bull breakout, and a lower low. It's a second entry buy. First entry did not go very far. And now we have a second bull bar closing on its high. This is a reasonable buy for the bulls hoping for. At least a test of this high. Maybe a couple legs up. You can also call it a wedge bottom. We have a breakout, pullback, second push, pullback, third push. It's a reasonable buy. At this point, we have five consecutive bull bars. And at this point, we have, what is that? Seven bars without a bear bar. Chances are we're going at least a little bit higher. If the bulls think the bears are weak, they'll keep holding on to their lungs. Once you get three or four bear bars, especially after a wedge bottom and a second entry buy, the market's probably transitioning at least into a trading range. The bulls think the market's going to go higher after three or four consecutive bull bars. They're going to start buying below bars. They'll buy below this bar. What is that? A 10 bar bull micro channel, betting that they'll get at least a small second leg up. And at this point, the bulls are wondering if this is a reasonable high or low major trend reversal. They'll buy above this bar or above this bar or that bar, betting on a second leg up. Leg one, pullback, leg two. We have 10 bars up without a pullback. That means the bears are not interested in selling at this price. The market has to go higher before it'll find sellers. At some point, the bulls will decide it's high enough and they'll take profits. And the bears will think that the price is a good value to sell. But that did not happen on this chart. At a minimum, after any kind of major reversal or series of sell climaxes, the market has to go 10 bars, two legs, sideways, two up before the bulls will stop buying and before the bears will think about selling. It sometimes can go much further. This is about 40 bars up and we still do not have much selling. The bears usually wait at least 10 bars and two legs before they sell. And if they see the rally being reasonably strong, they're still not going to sell. They'll assume that the market has to go higher. As the market's going up three, four, five consecutive bull bars, traders conclude there's no one left to sell at this price. And it has to go higher to find sellers. Will there be sellers here? Very tight bull channel. Probably traders will buy the first reversal back down and we'll probably get a second leg up. There are always bulls buying at prior lows looking for at least a scalp. A lot of these traders are weak bulls trying to buy and risk very little and eventually they give up and they stop buying. They buy here and they see the market going down. They panic and they sell. They buy at this low and they see it going down more. They panic and they sell. There are no more weak bulls left. They stop buying. Eventually what you're left with are strong bulls. Some of them are buying here and they're buying more aggressively and more confidently below these bars. And they're never going to sell out of their lungs. They're confident that the market will eventually reverse and they'll make a profit. I talked about consecutive climaxes. Every trend bar is a breakout and a climax. If you get a series of them, the market usually gets exhausted and has to go sideways and often reverses. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fourth of five videos on climaxes.