 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of three videos on trading climactic reversals. A climactic reversal is simply a failed breakout. Whenever you see a breakout and it does not look particularly strong, it usually means that the market is going to transition into a trading range fairly soon. Every breakout can succeed or fail. If it succeeds, it often leads to a measured move up and the breakout bar becomes a measuring gap. If it fails, the market usually reverses to beyond the start of the breakout bar and the bar is an exhaustion gap. I think it's always important to be thinking about what the strong bulls and bears are doing at any time and what the weak bulls and bears are doing. One of the things that I always like to watch is whether or not bulls can make money in a bear trend. And if they can, that usually means the bear trend is weakening and the market will probably soon transition into a trading range. For example, if a bull buys this low and buys more lower or simply instead of buying this low, buys the size of a scalp or two lower and makes money, that tells me that this bear channel is probably not all that strong. It's a stairs pattern. The pullbacks are overlapping the breakout point and it usually means that the channel will evolve into a trading range pretty soon. For example, we have a bear breakout, we have a second leg down, but some bulls will be buying below every low. And let's say a bull bought this low. He buys at the prior low. And he's willing to buy more a point or two lower. Remember when he's scaling in at a lower price, he always wants his next entry to be at least the size of a scalp. In the E-mini, that's one point. If he's adding to his trade, he wants to be buying one or two points below his first entry. So if he buys here, he might buy more here. And then if the market gets back to his first entry, he can get out break even on his first buy and then with a scalp profit on the second buy. And if that works, if the bulls can make money buying in a bear trend, it usually means the bear trend is not particularly strong and it will soon transition into a trading range. Again, after the bulls see that they made money buying this low, they're more inclined to buy this low. They place a limit order to buy at the low and buy more one or two points lower. Other bulls, instead of buying at that low, they simply place a limit order to buy one or two points below this low. Will the pullback from this breakout go back above the breakout point? If it does, then the limit order bulls will make money. They buy with the limit order here, then we add on a point or two lower here. And then they place a limit order to get out break even at their first entry, which is at that low. And if the market allows them to get out, then they made money. They get out break even on their first entry and with the profit on their second entry. This is a stairs pattern where the pullback overlaps the breakout point. And it's usually the sign of a channel that will soon transition into a trading range. Trading ranges are always trying to reverse. It goes down, it goes up, it goes down, it goes up. A lot of sideways bars, a lot of bars with prominent tails. When you see the market behaving that way, the market's probably going to have trading range price action all day. And you can see here, intensely sideways, lots of reversals, small bodies, and the market is in a very tight range. Even though the market's having a bear breakout here, you have to suspect that this type of price action will last the remainder of the day. This particular trading range is about half the size of an average recent day. And therefore, if the bears get a breakout, the size of the breakout might be the size of this upper range. Strong breakout, we have a breakout, a three bar breakout, and consecutive bear bars. Not particularly big, but still a three bar breakout and then an additional breakout here. The market's always in short. But look at the size of these breakout bars. Are they big relative to the bars to the left? No, not at all. They're really not big at all. And therefore, this is a weak breakout. Also, look at these bars. They have tails below. And look at the follow through bar. It's a doji bar. And then we have another bear bar, a breakout bar, but the big tail followed by another doji. This is therefore a fairly weak breakout. Three bar breakout, bad follow through. Bear breakout, bad follow through. Usually means that the breakout is not going to lead to a strong bear trend. When you have a breakout that's not particularly strong, you have to assume it's going to lead to a trading range soon. And if it's going to be a trading range, you may get a bull leg that retraces much or all of the breakout. In fact, a weak bear breakout might even lead to more than just a bull leg in a trading range. It could lead to a bull trend. In this particular case, it led to a trading range lasting 20 or 30 bars. Later in the day, it had a reversal from a slightly lower low major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout by going mostly sideways. And then we tested down at the lows and we have a second entry buy going into the close. When you see trading range price action, you're going to be looking to buy low, sell high and scalp. You can see the videos on trading and trading ranges for how to place those trades and how to manage your stops. When I'm talking about buying, it can be buying back shorts or it also can be talking about buying for a scalp up. And when I talk about selling in the trading range, selling high, I'm talking about selling to take profits on longs and then also selling to scalp shorts. You're going to exit longs on any reasonable sell signal. And at the bottom of the range, you're going to exit shorts on any reasonable buy signal. Let's say a trader sees this as a potential bear trend that could last a long time. He might sell the close of this bar, betting that the market will continue down far enough at least to make a profit. A trader taking that short needs a stop above the most recent major lower high, which is the high of this bear breakout. And it would be better if he can scale in if it pulls back. Now what happens after the trader sees what followed? He sees two doji's, three doji's. He's probably disappointed and a lot of the bears will buy back their shorts. And the bulls see that as well. They see doji bars after a week breakout and they think the market might be transitioning into a trading range. They like to take second entry buys. Here's a first entry buy above this bar and above this bar is a second entry buy. This is a reasonable buy. And now we have a slight double bottom. And this is even better because we have a pair of bull bars. And buying above bull bars is slightly higher probability. Are the bulls buying for a swing up? No, this is not a major trend reversal. It's a minor reversal after a bear breakout. So the bulls are buying for a scalp. And they'll take a scalper's profit. One or two points above. Or they'll look at a couple legs up and sell the close of a strong bull bar, betting against a bull reversal. Instead betting that it's a minor reversal. And if you have a strong bull bar after a minor reversal has gone on for a few bars, it's probably not going to have follow through. It's probably going to reverse back down. Now, the bears who sold this close, they'll sell more. If they did not get out here, they'll say, okay, any reversal is probably going to be minor. The sell off is fairly weak. So we may get a pullback that's pretty high up. But as long as it stays below the top of this major lower high, it's still a bear trend. And therefore, it's still okay to hold short. These bears are either selling a fixed number of points above, one, two, three points above, or at resistance like the breakout point. Or they'll sell a strong bull close near the moving average. Here's a second strong bull close, a small wedge rally, three pushes up, one, pull back, two, pull back, three. Or they'll sell on a reversal down, like below that bear bar, adding to the short position from right here. And then if it gets back down to their original short, they'll buy back the shorts, break even on the first short, and then with a profit on their higher short. The bears who sold down here, willing to sit through a pullback, were hoping there would be no pullback. They wanted the market just to go down. However, they were confident that the reversal would be minor. And if it's minor, the market would probably come back to their entry price and they could get out without a loss. And if they scale in higher, they can get out with a profit on their second entry. If you sold this close, hoping for a bear trend, and then you see this, and then you see a fairly significant minor reversal, you're probably thinking that instead of a bear trend, the market's forming a trading range. And they're disappointed by the size of this rally. And because it's a disappointing follow through after their breakout, and the breakout's not all that strong, the bears are probably switching to scalp mode. Sell the closed bears. They can either get out break even here, or they can add to their shorts for any reason, like below a bear bar at this bull close. Now we have a double top lower high, so they could sell below that bear bar, get filled over here, looking to get out around their low close. If you sold this close, your exit is here. You only add on if your second entry is at least the size of a scalp above your first. In the E-mini, that means you want the second entry to be at least one point above the first. If a bear sold this close, he gets out break even here. And part of the reason why the market reversed here is because you had disappointed bears buying at that low close. The bulls know that. The bulls see that they got a pretty good pullback. And they know the bears who sold the low closes are going to be buying back their shorts around those closes. And strong bears will place limit orders to buy at that low close. Betting that they're buying at the bottom of what will become a trading range. They're betting against a strong bear trend. They see the trading range price action. They see the weak breakout. They see the pretty good reversal up. They think the market's in the trading range. So they'll buy for any reason near the bottom of the range. And one reason is buying at the low close. Stop entry bulls. Some bulls prefer stop entries. They prefer second entry buys. Here's a first entry buy. Not good after four bear bars. Here's a second entry buy. It's better but it's still three doji's, no bull bar. And here's a third entry buy. You can call it a second entry buy. A small double bottom and a bigger double bottom. Bulls will buy a reversal up from the bottom of the range. This is a reasonable stop entry buy. All through here, the market is still always in short. And because it's still always in short, most traders are buying only for a scalp. I think it's reasonable to look at this as a double bottom, major trend reversal, bear trend, bull breakout. The bears were unable to get the bear trend to resume for 15 or 20 bars. So that's a sign of decent buying pressure. And therefore, buying this for a swing trade is okay. But look at the time. With this little time left in the day, most of the bulls who take this buy are only buying for a scalp. Most experienced traders do not like to reverse. So most traders are not buying this close and then reversing to short here and then reversing to long here. Usually, they like to wait a bar or two or three after they exit before they take a trade in the opposite direction. In part because trading is a little bit tiring and they need a break. And then the other reason is it's hard to be objective about taking an opposite trade when you're trading in one direction. Physically, it's also sometimes difficult to trade. You're more prone to make mistakes if you're trying to place a reverse order. However, if you can do it profitably and comfortably, then go ahead and do it. I want to talk a little bit about breakouts that succeed versus breakouts that fail. Measuring gaps versus exhaustion gaps. Every trend bar is a breakout and a climax. When I use the term climax, I'm usually referring to a bigger trend bar. It's an acceleration of a move up or down. It's a relatively extreme change in behavior. These are all climax bars. Relatively big bars here are bi-climaxes. Here's a two-bar climax. Here's a three-bar bi-climax. Here's a bi-climax based more on time. Six or seven bars up, five of them bull bodies. And for the bears, a two-bar cell climax. A big bar here, a couple follow-through bars. Climax, two-bar breakout. A one-bar bear bar, one-bar cell climax. A small cell climax. A small bear breakout attempt. A small rehearsal attempt. Most breakouts, most climaxes are minor. And they're just little parts of trading ranges or channels. And most are followed by minor trends or minor reversals or simply sideways trading. You can see the video on trading in trading ranges and in trading in broad channels for more information about how to trade this. Whenever you see a big breakout, for example, a bear breakout and a bear trend, after the trend has gone on for 20 or more bars, in other words, late in the trend, traders look for evidence of whether the breakout will succeed or fail. If it succeeds, they're looking at the breakout bar as a measuring gap. They're looking for a measured move down based upon the height of the range. If it's going to fail, they're expecting the gap to close. They're expecting the gap between this close and these lows to fail. They're expecting the market to reverse back up above these lows. And therefore, this bar, the gap attempt, is an exhaustion gap. Here we have a bear breakout, late in a bear trend. It's not particularly dramatic, but it is three consecutive bear bars, two closing on the bear. And we're breaking to a new low. You can argue there's a gap between the close of this bar and the low of the prior bar. That low, this low, that low. Those are all gaps. If this is an exhaustive end of the bear trend, traders expect the market to rally above all of those breakout points. And that's what happened. The market reversed up. And this series of bear bars, I call it an exhaustion gap. You can call it a reversal. It is a reversal. But the bears were hoping for a measured move down. They were hoping that the market would not get back above, especially this bar, the bottom of the trading range, and instead would fall for a measured move down. Become a measuring gap. But because it went back above that low and back above all these lows, this bear breakout is a failed bear breakout. And it's a climactic end of the bear trend. And I refer to it as an exhaustion gap. And this is a sign that the bears are giving up. A series of bull bars closing on their highs. When you have three decent bull bars like that, the market's probably always in long. Probably going to get at least a small second leg up. Now, we're rallying. And now we're accelerating upward above the top of the range and a strong breakout. However, this is occurring about 20 bars into the bull trend. You have to be thinking that it might be a climactic end of the bull trend instead of the beginning of a stronger leg up. Right now, there's a gap between the low of this bar and the high of this bar. The market might rally for a measured move up from the bottom down here to the gap here. It might rally for a measured move up. And therefore, this would be a measuring gap. On the other hand, whenever you get a breakout, a buy climax, late in a bull trend, it's more likely to be an exhaustive end of the trend than the shard of a new leg up. When you have a reasonably strong breakout like this, usually the market will have at least a small second leg up. And if it's going to fail and reverse down, usually there'll be at least a micro double top. At the moment that this bar closes, there are many different gaps. A gap between the close of the bar and any prior high, including the high of the bar right before the break up again. And also, there's a gap between the low of this bar. This bar sold off and rallied, so it's a pullback bar. There's a gap between its low and the breakout point right here. So there's a gap this low, that high. And it could lead to a measured move up from the bottom of the bull trend to the breakout point and possibly up here. Strong enough breakout for at least a small second leg up. We have a second leg up, a channel. We got a measured move up based upon the height of this breakout. Not a measured move up from the bottom of the range, from the bottom of the bull trend. But this is one reasonable measured move target. This particular breakout then became a measuring gap, even though it occurred 20 or more bars into the bull trend. In general, if you have a breakout occurring 20 or more bars into a bull trend, there's a 60% chance the breakout will fail. It might get one more push up and then fail. And a 40% chance of a measured move up. This is still fairly early in the trend. It's about 20 bars in and it's a reasonably good breakout. I don't know if it's 60% chance that it's going to fail. It might be 50-50 that after a small second leg up, it'll pull back. Strong bull trend. And now we have a bi-climax. We have a strong bull breakout. Strong enough for a second leg up. Well, we got a second leg up. And look at these two bars. They're the best looking bull bars since the trend began down here. Big bull bars closing on their highs. Do you think this is an acceleration of the trend and the start of a new leg up? Or do you think more likely it's an exhaustive end of the trend? The trend is fairly weak through here. And then we're in a tight training range here. Late in the bull trend. Whenever you have a tight training range, late in a bull trend, you have to be thinking it might be the final bull flag. And if we get a breakout from that final bull flag, the market will reverse back down to that bull flag. Again, 60% chance when you have an especially strong breakout late in a bull trend, it's going to be an exhaustion gap. Once this bar forms and you get a pullback bar here, the gap is between its low and the breakout point here. There's a little bit of overlap maybe here, but it's still possibly a measuring gap from this low to right here. And then we have another breakout here and another pullback. But look at this bar. Its low fell below the breakout point above the high of the spare bar. So it already closed that gap. Also, this bar was strong enough to get at least one more leg up. It met the minimum requirement. Now we have consecutive breakouts late in the trend, a possible final flag. This is probably an exhaustive move. 60% chance. At a minimum, we're going to test down to the bottom of the buy climax. When you get a buy climax, you should not be thinking about a reversal into an opposite trend. You should be thinking about an exhaustive end of the current trend. The bulls are exhausted. They're going to take profits. They'll wait about 10 bars or so to see whether the bears can create a reversal. If the bears are unable to create a convincing reversal, then the bulls will buy again. If the bears get a pretty good leg down, when the bulls buy, they'll bet on a trading range. Big up, big down, big confusion. Probably a trading range for the rest of the day. And therefore the bulls buying down here are now scalping instead of swing trading. If you see a climactic end of a trend and you're one for any reason, it's good to take profits. The market is giving you a gift. It's an exceptionally big surprise profit and you should take it because whenever the market gives you something that is surprising, it usually is going to take it away. Beginners see this. Let's say a beginner watched the whole trend and hoping for a pullback. They got a pullback and they thought it was not very good so they still didn't buy. And now they see this and they think, oh my gosh, this is becoming a huge bull trend. I got to buy. No, that's the exact opposite of what you should be doing. You should never be buying a breakout like this. It's much more likely to be an exhaustive end of the trend than an acceleration up into an even stronger trend. So the beginner who waited to buy all through here because he didn't want to buy the breakout, the stop was too far, and then he didn't want to buy here because the trend is weakening and it might reverse. Now he sees the trend getting strong again. Do not buy. This is more likely an exhaustive end of the trend and the strong bulls will take profits and the strong bears will sell, expecting the market to test down to the bottom of the breakout down here. Strong traders will sell the reversal down or they'll sell closes or they'll sell above this bear bar. Beginners can sell with a stop below this bear bar. We have basically an IOI and we have a second leg up. One pullback, two. We have a bear reversal attempt here, a bear reversal attempt here, and now we have a bear bar closing on its low. This is a reasonable short. Minimum goal is a test of the bottom of the buy climax and transition into a trading range. If a trader prefers higher probability, he can wait to see three or four consecutive bear bars and then start to sell closes. The only problem about selling this close is you're very close to the target. The market might bounce there after five bear bars. If you sold here, the fifth bear bar, chances are the reversal up will be minor, but you still have to rely on your stop up here. And there might not be much profit left because strong bears will buy back shorts down here and strong bulls will start looking to buy if they see the market stabilize around that low. Another opportunity to sell is here. We have a bull trend, a bear breakout, and a lower high. Tight bull channel, so not a strong sell. But now you have a second entry sell here, a lower high major trend reversal. You have a small bear body. At the end of the day, it's not going to be a major reversal. It's probably only going to be a scalp. However, it's a reasonable scalp. Some traders like higher probability trades and they like to wait until the market is clearly strongly bearish. So selling the third, fourth or fifth close, it's a higher probability trade, but your stop is up here whether or not you sold that close or sold below this bear bar or sold the fifth bear bar. The later you're selling after you see evidence of a strong bear trend or strong bears, you're paying for that higher probability with greater risk. You're selling further from where your stop is. And it's still reasonable to do it. Although I personally don't want to be selling this low down in a bull trend day, especially when I think the target is the bottom of the buy climax. So there might not be much left to the trade. However, the probability of making money if you take that short is high. It's higher than the probability selling with a stop below this bear bar or selling that close. And that's always the case. All trading is a trade-off between good risk reward and probability. If you wait for a higher probability trade, your stop is going to be further away. So your risk reward profile is worse. If you sell this close and use a very tight stop, your probability is low, but the risk reward ratio is good. You're risking very little for a big reward relative to your risk. As I said, experienced traders, when they see a big bull bar breaking out late in a trend like this, especially with the potential final lag, they're going to sell. They'll sell that close and they'll certainly sell the close of the second leg up, betting that it's much more likely an exhaustive end of the move. And the market is more likely to come down here than go up for the same distance. Here we have a strong bear bar, and it's probably the strongest, the biggest looking bear body of this entire trend, plus it's closing in its low. When you look at this, do you think, wow, the bear trend is accelerating and we're going to get an even stronger bear trend? Or you're thinking, wow, this is about the 15th bar in this bear leg and about the 50th bar in this bear trend, and it's the best looking bear bar in the entire past 20 bars or so. Well, there's a 60% chance it's an exhaustive end of the trend and we'll trade back above its high and a 40% chance we're going to get some kind of a measured move down. Is it a measuring gap? Maybe from this high down to that gap? Or is it an exhaustion gap? 60% chance it's an exhaustive end of the trend. Only 40% chance you're going to get a swing down from here without pulling back first. It's really tempting for beginners when they see this to say, gosh, I didn't sell any of this, but now we have an even stronger bear bar. I got to sell. It's tempting to do that, but that's the exact opposite of what you should be doing. You should realize that the strong bear see this and say, wow, I was not expecting that. What a gift. I'm going to use it to take profits. We're late in a bear trend, and now the market's giving me a very big bear bar, allowing me to buy back my shorts at a very low price. And when the bulls see that, they're saying, huh, that shouldn't have happened. That's got to be an exhaustive sell climax, and we're probably going to trade up. I'm looking to buy. A beginner can buy the reversal up here, higher probability to take the double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. We have a bear trend, a bull breakout that lasted about 15 or 20 bars, and we have a second entry buy. This channel is very tight, and plus it's not that many bars down. It's probably a minor reversal, and this is a second entry buy, and now we're about 20 bars into the correction. This is a higher probability for a swing up into the close. Strong bulls, experts will buy that close, betting that we're probably not going to fall very far, and we might be buying the low of the day. I want to talk a little bit about the behavior of strong and weak traders. Strong bull trend. Strong bull trend. Strong bull trend. Strong bull trend. Now what happens up here? Some bulls did not want to buy bad follow-through, tail, dojis. They're looking at this, it's not all that strong, they want to buy a pullback. And they finally have a pullback, and they decide, well, it's not that strong, I got to wait for strength before I buy again. And then they see this big bull bar and another big bull bar. Those weak bulls who did not buy down here suddenly decide to buy. They see extreme strength, and they're hoping that the trend now is going to become much stronger than it was below. And that's a mistake. When you see extreme strength occurring late in a trend, it's more likely the final move. It's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend than the start of an even stronger leg up. The weak bulls buy, but the strong bulls have already bought, and they see this as a great opportunity to sell at a very good price. So the strong bulls are selling, not buying. And the weak bears who've been selling every reversal, hoping for a bear trend, finally give up. So part of this buying is the weak bears buying back their shorts. Part of it is the weak bulls buying, hoping for a strong trend up, but there are not enough weak traders. Most traders are strong. Most traders are institutional, and they're doing the opposite. The strong bulls see this and this. They're taking profits. They're going to wait 10 bars or more before they look to buy again. They expect that this is an exhaustive end of the trend. And the strong bears see the same thing, and they're selling. Again, the weak bears who've been selling, selling, selling, selling, can't take it anymore, and they give up. They buy back their shorts. Those weak bears who are selling, selling, selling, and finally giving up, and finally giving up. They know it might be a climactic end of the trend, but they're so exhausted and so afraid of losing anymore. They've lost so much already today that they just have to get out. They're just afraid that even though the chance of it being a measuring gap is small, 40% or less, they don't want to take the chance. They've already lost too much today, so they have to buy back their shorts. Once the weak bears buy back their shorts, they're not going to be selling again. And once the weak bulls finally make the mistake of buying the breakout, who's left to buy? The strong bulls are not buying up here. And the strong bears, are they going to exit their shorts? No. The reason why they're strong is they're never going to exit their shorts. They're going to have stops way up and they'll keep scaling in higher. Who's left to buy? There's nobody left to buy. The strong bulls took the difficult trade. They bought the breakout early on. They bought the high one bull flag, the high two bull flag. They bought closes all the way up. Their stop is now very far below. When the market is up here, they're starting to take profits. When they see this, they're thinking, wow, that's a surprise. My stop is still down here, maybe down here. It's much further down than I want it to be. I'm going to reduce my risk, so I'm going to take partial or full profits. The reason the weak bulls did not buy here, they're afraid of risk. All they think about is risk. They don't want to blow their account. They worked hard to save enough money to try to become a trader. All they think about is risk. They don't think about reward or probability. Therefore, they're afraid to take the breakout trade. So they missed the trade. The strong bears see this as a strong breakout on a higher time frame chart, even though it's bull bar, bad follow through, bull, bad follow through, bull, bad follow through. On a higher time frame chart, for example, this is a five minute chart. On a 15 minute chart, it's a very strong bull breakout. Those strong bears are not selling. They know the market's going higher. The strong bulls see this. They know it's the weak bears giving up, and they know that the weak bulls are finally buying. The bulls who are afraid to buy all the way down here are finally buying. They know there's nobody left to buy, and therefore this is probably a climactic end of the trend. A good time to take profits. They take profits. As soon as this bar closes, they take profits. It creates that bear bar. Some bulls wait for a second leg up after this breakout. They take profits. That creates that bear bar. This bear bar. And then more and more bulls are taking profits. And bears are doing the same thing. They're selling. They're selling that close. It creates that bear bar. They're selling that close. It creates that bear bar. And then more and more traders are selling. The remaining bulls sell out, and the remaining bears sell in. A lot of the bulls are holding on to their lungs, waiting for some sign that the final weak bears give up. And when they see this, they know the bears are giving up, and they're looking to take profits. The bulls are taking profits. They know the opportunity is probably going to be brief because they know that the strong bears are going to look at it as a great opportunity to sell at a high price. A lot of trading range trading here. A lot of trading range trading here. Bad follow through after the bull bars. The market is soon probably going to convert into a trading range, and this buy climax is probably going to be the end of the rally. And therefore, traders will be selling at the top of what might become a trading range. If you're a strong bull, and you take your profits here or here, are you going to buy again two or three bars later? No. If you bought down here, and you're finally taking profits, you're not going to be buying again two or three bars later. You're going to wait at least 10 bars. You also know that the market is likely to test down to the bottom of the most recent buy climax. And therefore, you're not going to buy until the market gets down there. And only if you get a reasonable buy setup, and you probably want to wait for at least a couple legs sideways to down before you buy again. If a strong bull thought the pullback was just going to be a bar or two, he's not going to exit. If he thinks it's just going to be a little pullback, he's not going to exit. He's going to hold long. The strong bulls want to see if the bears are going to be able to create a strong reversal down. So they want to wait at least 10 bars or so to see how strong the bears are. And if the bears are not all that strong, then the bulls will buy again. But after 10 bars down and a tight channel and an exhaustive buy climax, they suspect the market is going to be in a trading range for the rest of the day, especially with all of these small bars here. Big up, big down, big confusion usually means the trading range. We have a tight trading range here, trading range price action. The strong bears know the bulls will see this as an opportunity to take profits and that the bulls will not buy again for at least 5 or 10 bars and at least after a test of this low. And therefore it's a great opportunity to sell for a scalp down to that low. They're doing the exact same thing that the bulls are doing. The bulls are selling to take profits. The bears are selling to get short. Initial target, the bottom of the most recent buy climax right down here. And the bulls and bears both know a trading range is likely. This is a good location for the bears to take profits on these shorts. Tight channel, the bulls probably will not buy until we go sideways a little bit. And then they'll buy here, a small double bottom. This low, that low. Above that bull bar first entry, above this bull bar second entry. But they're only looking for a scalp up at this point. A lot of small sideways bars, a lot of doji bars. The market's probably going to be sideways for the rest of the day. Now, some strong bears started selling here. Maybe they started selling here. In any case, by definition, a strong bear is not going to be forced to buy back his shorts. Only rarely. He's looking to short. He's going to look to sell higher. Not many bears are selling here, but they're definitely selling here. And these bears, they're going to need to see a really strong rally for them to get out of their shorts. They'll look at any rally as an opportunity to sell more at an even better price. Will the strong bulls keep buying, trying to force the strong bears out? No, they know the market's too expensive now. They see a lot of trading range price action. They see a rally with a lot of trading range price action. They know the market's probably entering a trading range. And the bears know that as well. And the bears are going to sell more higher. And therefore, the bulls are not going to be buying up here, trying to force those strong bears to give up. Because they know they're going to fail. They know too many other bulls are going to be taking profits. And there will not be enough strong bulls buying up here to make the market go higher. Too many bulls eager to take profits. Not enough bulls wanting to buy. Too many bears wanting to sell. My general rule after a buy climax is the bulls will wait about 10 bars and 2 legs sideways to down before buying again. They want to see if the bears are strong enough to create a strong bear trend. If they are, the bulls do not want to buy. However, if the bears are not particularly strong, and they were not particularly strong here, then they'll look to buy for a scalp back up. Overbought market, buy climax, they know the breakout is going to attract strong bears. And therefore, they expect the market is going to have a hard time going much higher. They're going to switch to looking to buy value. Instead of buying a breakout betting on continued momentum, they're now only willing to buy value. They want to pull back. They want to buy cheap. Market pulling back. The bear is unable to get a strong reversal. We are in the neighborhood of the bottom of the buy climax. In the neighborhood of this tight trading range where the market went sideways earlier. The bulls will begin to look to buy. Very tight channel. They'll wait for a second entry buy. Like above this bar or above that bar. I began by talking about how a weak breakout usually means that instead of a trend, the market will soon transition into a trading range. I then talked about how breakouts can succeed and lead to measured moves become measuring gaps or fail and become exhaustion gaps. And finally, I talked about how weak and strong traders behave with breakouts. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of three videos on trading climatic reversals. over the last two videos on Amazon have developed, but now they check out the doctors to wait and