 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video is on trade management and on taking profits. I'm going to be talking about management defaults that traders can use when they're deciding how to take profits. Obviously, you want to take profits before they disappear. And you have to have a goal when you enter your trade. And then you adjust your goal as you see the strength of the move. For example, let's say you sell this bear breakout down here, hoping that maybe we'll get a measured move down. So leg one, pull back leg two, or simply a measured move based upon the height of the bear breakout, pull back, and then measured move down. Let's say you're hoping for a measured move from the open of the first big bear bar to the close of the second big bear bar. And this is one times that move. It's a reasonable target. And then you see the market reversing up strongly before it gets to your target. Should you wait and let your stock get hit, hoping that the target will eventually be reached? No. The premise of a measured move down after you see this reversal and the market going above the high of that strong reversal bar, your premise of the measure move down is no longer valid. So you have to exit. We've got a strong bear breakout. You might trail your stop up here. And then we get the strong bull reversal bar. Most traders will get out above the high of this bar. Should you just get out on the close of this bar? I would not, because sometimes you get the strong bull reversal bar, and then the trend continues down, and the market does not go above the top of the bull bar. So I think you move your stop to above the high of this bar, thinking that it's a valid buy setup. So bulls will be buying there. Bears should get out there. You just exit, and your premise of a measured move down is no longer valid. So just get out as the market reverses. Remember, you have a final flag, and then you get a reversal from the final flag. The bulls are going to be buying this. They see a bear trend, a trading range, potential final flag, a trading range late, and a bear trend, and then a very strong reversal up. So bulls are going to be buying here. Most traders who buy this reversal will put their stop down here. So their initial risk is from just above the high of this bull reversal bar to just below the low of that bar. So that's their initial risk. This is a reasonably high probability trade. You do not have to hold for a profit that's two times your risk. You can get out with a profit that's just one times your risk. You buy above the high of the bull bar, stop below, and this is one times that risk. And that is reasonable to get out there. Reasonable does not mean ideal. Just because something makes mathematical sense doesn't mean that it's the best choice. Mathematically, it's always good to take part off at two times your initial risk. So this is one times initial risk, and this is two times initial risk up there. I'm talking initial risk. The trader's equation uses actual risk. So if you buy just above the high of this bull reversal bar, and let's say the market just kept going straight up, your actual risk may have been one tick or two ticks, three ticks. If you're trading Forex markets, it may have only been two or three pips. However, with the bars this big and the reversal this strong, you do not want to be getting out at two times your actual risk. If your actual risk is only two ticks or two pips, you don't want to be exiting with just four pips profit. Most traders would base their profit target on initial risk, which is below the bottom of the buy signal bar. You could get out mathematically. This would be okay. It's the top of a trading range. High enough probability, strong enough momentum up. Look at this. We have six consecutive bull bars up here. Do you really want to be exiting at one times your initial risk? While mathematically it's reasonable to get out at one times initial risk, the context is good for probably a couple legs up. And at this point, we only have one leg up. And with the six consecutive bull bars, the probability is we're going higher. So most traders should take their profit at two times the initial risk, or at least partial profits up there. I talked about actual risk. I'm saying actual risk is to below the low of this bar. It might not even be there. You've got the reversal. You buy above the high of this bar, so you get filled right here. And the market may not have pulled back there. But let's say it did pull all the way to the low of the bar and then went up. So your actual risk is only that big. It's a strong reversal, high probability of making a profit. So you could always exit at one times actual risk. Mathematically, it would be okay to buy here and exit there. And if you do that a hundred times, you will make money. It's a high probability trade. So one times actual risk is mathematically reasonable to do. However, just because it's mathematically reasonable doesn't mean it's the best thing to do. It's rarely the best thing to do. When the actual risk is small like this and the probability of a big profit is high, it's much better to go for a bigger profit. As long as the trader's equation is positive, you can always exit using that target. I talk more about this in the video on actual risk. While it's okay to get out at one times actual risk, when there are obvious targets that are better, more profitable, with still good math, still a good trader's equation, it's better to be looking at them. Let's say you held long and you were planning on getting out at maybe two times initial risk. Initial risk here, you buy here. Risk is here. Two times initial risk is somewhere up here. And then you see this. We broke out and we pulled back. And this is a breakout test of that high. I don't know if this slightly overlapped. That doesn't matter if it's a slight negative gap. By negative gap, I mean the pullback slightly overlaps the breakout point. It doesn't matter. It's still a possible measuring gap. So from the low here to the breakout test here, you project up there's one times the risk. And that would be a reasonable target. So buying here, you could get out one times actual risk, or you could look for other targets based upon the price action. And it would be reasonable to buy a measured move up based upon the height of this leg down, especially once you have this breakout test reversing up after testing the breakout point. You have a good chance of a measured move up. And this would be a good location to take profit. Obviously, a positive trader's equation because it's far more than two times actual risk. Again, it's always mathematically acceptable to take profits at two times actual risk. And that means it's always acceptable to take profits at two times initial risk, which is greater than actual risk. So let's say actual risk is to just below the low of this bar. It's probably less. It probably did not go down here after triggering the entry. Then this would be two times that risk. Here's your actual risk. Here's two times your actual risk. So it would be okay to take profits, full profits, 100% of the time here. Initial risk is your entry price. So you risk from there down to here. And this is two times initial risk. So mathematically, it's okay to take profits at two times there. One choice is if you want to take bigger profits is maybe take half off at two times actual risk. So actual risk, one times actual risk, two times actual risk. Take half off here and take another 25% off maybe at three times actual risk. And then let the remaining 25% go as long as the trend is valid. And you can use the same logic to initial risk as well. Maybe take 25% off at twice the initial risk and another 25% off at three times the initial risk. And swing the remainder and get out if your premise looks like it's no longer valid. Maybe after the close of two big bear bars or three big bear bars. We have a huge bear breakout. High probability of lower prices. This is the euro versus the dollar, a 15-minute chart. Probably going to get a spike in channel down. Let's say you sold the close of this bar. And your initial stop is at the top of the bear breakout. And it's about 95 pips above. So your initial risk is 95 pips. If you typically risk 20 pips on 100,000 units and this risk is five times bigger, you have to trade five times smaller. So maybe you trade 20,000 units. So you sell 20,000 units. Alternatively, you can argue that this bear breakout is so strong, the market should not get much above a 50% pullback. So maybe put a stop slightly above a 50% pullback. 50% pullback may be here. Put your stop slightly above. In that case, you could trade a little bit bigger, maybe 40,000 units. Strong bear breakout. Probably going to get a measured move down. Maybe based upon the open of the bear breakout to the close of the bear breakout. Measured move down would be somewhere down there. At this point, I think probably a 60% chance we're going to get around a measured move down from the open of the first breakout bar to the close of the second breakout bar. And this is the measured move down. Probably, whenever I say probably, that means I'm at least 60% certain. If you plug 60% into the trader's equation, you can exit at one times risk and have a profitable strategy. One times risk means bad risk reward. Your reward is only as big as your risk. And that's not a strong risk reward profile. But that's always the case whenever you have a high probability trade. When you're selling down here, some institution is buying. And they know that the probability is they're going to lose money. But they also know that they're going to have a pretty good risk reward profile. They buy here and maybe put a stop here. Maybe even a stop down here. And plan to scale in by more lower. You're getting high probability. They're getting low probability. But they're getting reasonable risk reward. We have another bear breakout here. So traders might lower their stops to above here. Strong enough breakout to expect at least a little bit more down. At least another leg down. We have another bear breakout with follow through here. So a lot of traders will say this is a major lower high. And they'll trail their stop down. Initial stop was up here. And then after this breakout, they trailed it down here. After this breakout, they trail it here, just above the top of this bear leg. Same thing here. Another bear breakout. Stop is up here. Do they get out here? We have a micro double bottom and we're trying to reverse up. We have a series of bars in a bull micro channel. No pullback. Well, you could get out above that bull bar. Or you could rely on your stop. You could say, well, we got close to the measured move target twice. And we're reversing up. Maybe I should get out here. That is reasonable. It's also reasonable to hold. And then get out either at that low or at your initial target. There are always other reasons to exit as well. But you have to look for them. For example, you could draw a channel. This pink line. And this is at the bottom of a channel. Or you could say three pushes down. One, two, and then three. And it's almost to the measured move target. We're very close to it. We have a big bear bar late in the trend. In fact, this is the biggest bear bar probably in the past 40 or 50 bars. So you have to be thinking that it's probably an exhaustion gap, which means we're probably going to close the gap between the close of this bar and the close of the prior bar. Usually what it means is the market's going to get to the top of the bear bar. And here we have a low one short, a breakout pullback short, a breakout and a pullback, but not a particularly strong looking sell. Because it's a weak sell and we're at the bottom of two channels and we're right near a measured move target and we have the biggest bar late in a bear trend. This is a weak sell setup. Bulls will buy below that bar, betting that the bear breakout will fail. And if bulls are going to buy, it's reasonable for the bears to buy back their shorts, even though it's not a clear bottom, you could continue to hold short, but most traders would end up taking profits at a new low, especially since it's at the measured move target. So there's very little left to gain by holding short. Here we've got a pretty strong reversal up. Why did we get that strong reversal up? Because the final bears bought back their shorts. It hit their target. The trend was weakening. We have a potential exhaustion move here. We have a decent rally here and bears see that. So they think there's not much left to the trade. If they did not buy back their shorts at the target, they'll buy back their shorts on the reversal up. It's a lower low major trend reversal. Let me look at the math a little bit here. Here. Initial risk was to above the high of this bear breakout. So they're initially risking about 95 pips if they sell here. Actual risk was only 9 pips. You sell this close. It rallied 8 pips. You stop as 1 pip above. So your actual risk is only 9 pips. If a bear exited here, he would have 77 pips profit. Because the breakout was strong, once we started down, you can see your actual risk is 9 pips. After a strong breakout like that, you knew there was at least a 60% chance of making at least 1 times actual risk. And you could exit at 1 times actual risk. So there's your actual risk. You can exit 1 times actual risk. But just because something is mathematically reasonable doesn't mean it's the best choice. Also, remember, it's 9 pips. Do you want to be taking a 9 pip profit? Of course not. Because when you're scalping in forex markets, all of your trades should be at least 10 pips. That's the minimum scalp size. Scalping for less than 10 pips is rarely going to be a profitable strategy. This is 1 times actual risk. So you sell here. Theoretically, you could get out down here. But that is, I think, not a very good thing to do. You should avoid taking small profits when there's a big move that is likely. Actual risk can be used to find a minimum target. But minimum does not mean the best. So if you think there's a probability of a big move, don't exit at 2 times or 1 or 2 times actual risk. When you see a strong breakout like this, there's a 60% chance that breakout will lead to a measured move. Even if it's mathematically acceptable to scalp out either here or here, that does not mean it's a good thing to do. In fact, you should not do it. I'm talking pips. When you trade forex, you're always talking about pips. If you search online, there are lots of forex profit calculators. You can use them to estimate the profit in U.S. dollars. And that's not only for the euro versus the dollar. That's for any forex product. For example, the euro versus the yen. You can plug in the number of pips and the prices and this unit size, how many units you're trading. And the calculator would tell you how many dollars. For example, here, if you ended up exiting down here, you sell here, you exit here, you made 77 pips profit on 50,000 units. And if you plug it into a forex calculator, profit calculator, the profit would be about $485. Now, instead of selling 50,000 units, let's say you sold 500,000 units. Then your profit is about $4,800, close to $5,000. And the reason I bring that up is because $5,000 is a magic number for traders. Because if a trader is able to average $5,000 profit a day, that translates to about a million dollars a year. If a trader is starting to become consistently profitable, they start thinking about making $1,000 a day, $2,000 a day. And then they realize that, hey, if I make $5,000 a day and I trade 200 days or 200 plus days a year, that translates into a million dollars a year. So $5,000 is a magic number for traders. Here we have a rally and then we gapped up on the open. And the market tried to reverse down bear bar. It tried to resume up and then it tried to reverse down again a second time. So this is a failed breakout above yesterday's high and a second entry short. That's a 60% probability trade of making money if you take that short. Second failed breakout above yesterday's high. And you have a decent sell signal bar, so we're probably going to go lower. And we'll probably make at least two times the initial risk. And then look what takes place here. A tight trading range late in a bear trend. It's possibly the final bear flag. Tight channel, still always in short. But you might get a couple legs up. Here you got one and not a second. Because of the possibility of a final flag and two legs up, it's okay to take partial or full profits above the high of this bar. Why is it okay to take profits here? Well, you got a potential final flag. As are, very tight channel. The reversal will be minor, which means either a bear flag or a trading range and then more down. But it's okay to take profits here. You have a potential final flag. And look at your profit. You have seven points profit, which is far greater than two times actual or initial risk. So you have a strong trader's equation. The math is okay to take profits here. Tight bear channel, probably going lower. So it's also okay to hold short. Probably better to exit here or maybe here. It's about the same price. Here we got a double bottom and we're converting into a tight trading range. So instead of a tight bear channel, now we're in a tight trading range here. 10 bars here, 20 bars. And at this point, you got to be thinking about the possibility of trend reversal up being almost as likely as trend resumption down. So I would get out here or here. So you made seven points profit. If you get out here, you made seven points profit. And if you traded one contract after commissions, that would be about $345. If you traded 20 contracts, that would be about $6,900. $5,000 is a magic number for traders. There are over 200 trading days a year. And if you average $5,000 a day, that translates into a million dollars a year. When traders are beginning to increase their positions and their profit, so they make $1,000 a day, then they make $2,000 a day. What's the next target? $5,000 a day. Because it translates into a very big round number of profit at the end of the year, a million dollars. Every trader has a dream, right? And you're paying attention to goals. And one goal is $1,000 a day. Another goal is $5,000 a day. In this video, I talked about defaults to use when taking profits. The minimum default is always two times actual risk. But sometimes the actual risk is small. And then traders should instead think about using two times initial risk as their minimum target for taking at least partial profits. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video is on trade management and taking profits.