 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on support and resistance. I talked about support and resistance in the prior videos. I'm going to begin by giving other examples of support and resistance. In particular, I'm going to be talking about round numbers. For example, Dow 20,000 is an important magnet. I'm then going to give a list of what I think are important sources of support and resistance. On the left, I have a monthly chart. And on the right, I have a five minute chart of the last day of the month. It turns out this was also the last day of the year. At the end of a month, the market often pays attention to monthly support and resistance. At the end of the week, the appearance of the weekly chart is being determined. And the market will pay attention to support and resistance on the weekly chart, especially in the final hour of the day. Monthly chart. The close of the month, the high of the month are important. This is the current month. Traders will look at the open of the month, which is right here. They'll look at the close of the prior month, the high of the prior month, the high of this month, the low of this month, the low of last month, the open of last month, and the final minutes of the month. Traders will pay attention to all support and resistance on the monthly chart. The most nearby support and resistance at the end of this month, the final minutes of the month, of the month are going to be the open of the current month, the close of the last month, the high of the last month. Pink line, this was the high of last month. You can see we went above it and we pulled back. We're above it and we're pulling back. So at the end of the day on this five minute chart, some traders will look at the monthly chart to see if there is support and resistance. And they'll watch how the five minute chart reacts to the monthly support and resistance. Here's the close of last month, that blue line right there. Here's the open of this month. Again, this is on the monthly chart what's taking place here. And at the end of the month I tend to take a look at the monthly chart to see if any monthly support or resistance might be affecting the appearance of the trading today and the five minute chart. I'm aware of the high of last month. You can see the markets trying to hold above it and then it broke below it. It broke below it and tested the close of last month and bounced. And then this is a test of the high of last month. I'm going to look to buy a reversal up here. Did not get far. We're in a bear trend, bear bar. I'm going to be selling a reversal down here, betting that the high of last month is now resistance. And you can see when it got down to the open of this month, there were buyers. The bulls wanted this month to have a bull bar, even a tiny bull body. So they bought. The bears wanted this month to have a bear body and they were selling, but it looks like the bulls are winning. At the end of the month you can see this is the close of the day and it's also the close of the month. It's slightly above the open of the month. And therefore, even though it looks like a perfect doji in the monthly chart, in fact, it has a small bull body. Again, traders paying attention to support and resistance on the monthly chart when they're trading on the five minute chart. The high of last month, possible support. The market broke below it. So you have to assume it's now resistance. If you get a rally near it, traders will sell a reversal down. Tested the close of last month, tried to get a double bottom. Very tight bear channel, probably a minor reversal. Which means the reversal will either be a bear flag or a trading range. Traders will look to sell a reversal down. End of the day, you can see profit taking right around the open of this month, the current month. This is the euro versus the dollar. Here's the monthly chart on the left and here's the five minute chart on the right. This is the final day of the month. When I'm trading the final day of the month, I usually take a look at the monthly chart to see if there's any nearby support or resistance on the monthly chart because it'll affect trading on the five minute chart. This is the current month and this is the final day of that current month. And all through here, the market looks like it's hovering around a certain price. You look to the left on the monthly chart. It's hovering around last month's low. The market's trying to get support at last month's low. And then you start to see this and you have to conclude the market is not going to hold the support of last month's low and it's going to fall below last month's low. You have a sell the close finish. On the last day of the month, last month's low was support for many hours during the day. The market kept trying to reverse up, but ultimately it failed. A series of bear bars. These two bear bars closing on their lows. Bulls giving up. Head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder. Head. Right shoulder. Or left shoulder and then head. Double bottom. And then right shoulder. It fell below this higher low. A major higher low. Sold off. Fell below this and sold off. Fell below the bottom of the head and shoulders bottom. And sold off. Different computers are using different lows as the signal to get out of longs and to get short. All three are important. And you can see the market just collapsed and gave up its attempt to try to hold above last month's low. And this month closed below last month's low. This is the close of the month. It's below last month's low. This is the New Zealand dollar versus the US dollar. And it's a weekly chart. Trading ranges are support and resistance. The market broke below a trading range and tried to get back above. Tried to get back above. Tried to get back above. It was support. Bulls bought at that price level here. Broke below. Now it's resistance. After a breakout. This was support. Support. Support. We get a breakout. It's now resistance. Traders will sell a rally back up to the bottom of the trading range betting that it is now resistance. Pretty good breakout above the top of the small trading range. You have to assume the top of the trading range now is support. Traders will look to buy at support at the top of the range or on a reversal up. Here's a bear trend. Traders are looking to sell at resistance. There are many ways to look at resistance here. An obvious one is the moving average. The average price. This is a 20 bar exponential moving average. Once you start to see a bear trend. Traders are going to be looking to sell anytime the market gets back to the average price. Betting that the average price is too expensive. And the market will then get a new low. Trying to get above the average price. Pair of bear bars. Sell below either that bear bar or this bear bar. Get filled here. A three push rally. One, two, three. To the moving average. Traders will sell below a bear bar. Here or here. We have a double top this high, that high. At the moving average. Reversal down. Two legs up. One pullback two. Maybe a wedge. One, two, three. Wedge bear flag. Sell below a bear bar. Closing on its low. Get filled here. Double top. Bear bar. Sell below the bear bar. Sell below the pullback from the breakout. This is the breakout of the double top. We have a pullback attempt. Sell below that. Another test of the moving average. Low two. Low one. Low two. You can call it a double top. And a breakout above a double top. And that's a type of a wedge. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Anytime you have a double top and then a breakout above the double top, you have three pushes. One, two, three. It's a type of wedge. The failed breakout above the double top. It's therefore a wedge bear flag. It's at the moving average. Sell the reversal down. This is also a gap bar. The first bar with a low above the moving average. And when you're in a bear trend, the first time the market does anything, you have to assume it'll fail. The bulls finally get a bar above the moving average. You have to assume the reversal will fail and the market will fall. Here, first time to touch the moving average in about 20 bars, bears will sell. Round numbers are also important. They can be support and resistance. Here's a bear trend. And here are some round numbers. Multiples of 10 in the E-mini. Traders will look at that as minor support or resistance. And a bear trend. It was support here, it became resistance here. Traders often put stops or profit targets at or slightly beyond round numbers. And therefore, trading is taking place and it creates support and resistance. Also, you have the issue of option strike prices. The price of the E-mini is about 10 times as great as the Spyder. E-mini of 2110 is close to Spyder 211. And 211 is an option strike price. 212, 213, 210, all option strike prices. Institutions sell options. They want options to expire worthless. So, they pay a lot of attention to options strike prices. The institutions that sell, for example, 211 Spyder put or call, they want it to expire worthless. So, if at the end of the month the Spyder is near 211, the institutions will try to get it to close as close to 211 as possible. So, that as many options will expire worthless as possible. And 211 approximately equals the E-mini 2100 and 10. And therefore, 2110 is an important price. This is a big round number, 2100. To me, this is a small round number. That's a multiple of 100. And this is a step that's only 10 points. This is more of a minor round number, but it's still important. The strike prices are magnets. If they can get the Spyder to expire exactly at certain strike prices, they have a better chance of having the options, the puts and calls at that strike expire worthless. So, the institutions will be placing trades in every market. Futures, stocks, anything they possibly can trade in to help options expire worthless at the end of option expiration. The market's rallying and wondering, where do I put my initial stop? Maybe just a little bit below 2090. The market is bouncing here. Where should I sell? Well, maybe at the moving average. Maybe I'll place a limit order to sell at the round number, 2090. When you're trading, a lot of times you have to make quick decisions. And you're not sure where to place stops, where to take profits. And a quick, easy way to do it is just grab a round number. And because a lot of traders do that, round numbers are important and therefore they are magnets and therefore support and resistance. Apple, monthly chart. In the stock market, if a stock gets near 100, it becomes an extremely important big round number. Once a stock rallies to around 90, it's usually going to get to 100. Traders know that. And the bulls buy. And bears don't want to sell because they believe it's going to get to 100 as well. So they wait to sell at 100. And you often get up to 100 quickly. Here the market's at 92. And a pullback. Traders buy, assuming it's going to get to 90. It's going to get to 100. And it got slightly above 100. And then sold off. Why would it sell off? Because the bulls have bought here, bet it was going to get to 100. And they're taking profits there. And the bears assumed that 100 would be resistance. And they're looking to sell at 100 or slightly above. And the result was you get a reversal. Here we broke relentlessly above 100. Traders are going to buy back at 100. It was resistance. Now it's going to be support. Traders will place limit orders to buy at 100 or slightly below. In fact, you can see this high 92 became support as well. Some bears assume when the market's rallying that it's going to come back down and test support. Big round number, 100 support. So you have some bears selling up here, expecting it to test 100. And you have bulls who are taking profits up here, looking to buy on the test of 100. So they'll buy here. And you can see the market raced down to 100, below 100. The bears bought back their shorts and the bulls bought. And we got a pretty strong reversal up. Crude oil, daily chart. Strong bear trend. And the market is just above 40. If you watch television, you'll hear traders start to talk about a 30 handle. A 30 handle means a price that has 30 at the start of it. A 30 handle is anything between 30 and 39.99. When the market starts to get near 40, it usually is going to fall below 40. Because traders want to see what will happen if it gets a 30 handle. Will it collapse down to 30? Will it collapse down below 30? Or will buyers come in? Part of this strong sell-off is that. It's a vacuum test of the 30 handle. And traders bought as soon as it had a 30 handle. It fell a little bit below 40. And they bought. They bought strongly. And then look what happened when it got up to a big round number, 50. It went a little bit above. And it sold. So the traders have bought at 40. A lot of them took profits around there. The bears assumed that 50 would be a big round number. Resistance. They assumed bulls will take profits. And the bears sell. And they get a scalp. It tested 50 again. Same process. The bulls who bought this bull flag again took profits. And the bears who saw the sell-off originally at 50 sold again. And you get a double top bear flag. This is the dollar versus the Swiss franc. A 240 minute chart. It's a bull trend. Traders are going to look to buy pullbacks to the moving average. This is the average price. I have a 20 bar exponential moving average here. But any moving average works. All of them are some measure of an average price. Gets near the moving average. Traders start to buy above the high of the prior bar. Near the moving average. They'll buy above the prior bar. Moving average. They'll buy above the prior bar. Moving average. Bull bar. Even better to buy above its high. Again, a moving average test. They buy above the high. Big round number. .900. Big round number. .9100. The market gets vacuumed up to the big round number. And bulls take profits. Bears sell for a scalp. Broke above it. And pulled back to it. Reversed up. So what was resistance now is support. Next big round number or P. 9100. .9100. Bulls take profits. Bears sell. They sold again. We got a couple legs down. Daily chart of the E-mini. Many traders pay attention to simple moving averages. Popular ones are 50 day moving average. 100 day. 150 day. 200 day. I have them color coded here. And in a bull trend. Bulls will buy reversals up after the market pulls back to any of these moving averages. You can see it pull back to the pink line. 150 day moving average. Reversed up. Fell below the yellow line. The 200 day moving average. Reversed up. And you can see a lot of the reversals are taking place at these lines. Pull back to the 50 day moving average. Kept reversing up. Traders are looking for reversal attempts down. Betting the bears will fail. 80% of reversal attempts in a bull trend will fail. One support level is a moving average. And traders look to buy a reversal up from any of the moving averages. They never know in advance which one will be the bottom. But if they see the market reversing up from the neighborhood of a line, they will look to buy. A bear trend. The Euro versus the British pound. And here are a series of simple moving averages. 50 day. 100 day. 150 day. And 200 day. Any time the market gets near a line, if it starts to reverse down, traders will look to sell the reversal down. Simple moving averages provide support and resistance. This is a daily chart of the Euro versus the British pound. And big round numbers can be important as well. So multiples of 100 pips. Here multiples of 1000 pips. You can see the market fell and then went sideways. It was finding support at .800. Ultimately it got a bear breakout and it raced down to the next big round number, .700 and bounced. Bears took profits here. Bulls bought at the big round number, bending that the bears would take profits and we would get at least a small bounce. Multiples of 100 pips. Multiples of 1000 pips. Support and resistance. Traders often put stops just beyond the big round numbers. And they also take profits at the big round numbers as well. Round numbers. There are options strike prices for currency future options and forex options. Forex options, no one that I know trades them so they're not widely traded. But some traders do trade currency forex options. Institutions sell the options. They want the options to expire worthless. Options expire worthless at strike prices. Institutions are always going to try to manipulate the price of the underlying, for example, a forex market, so that when an option is expiring it will be around a big round number. And because the option strike prices are important, they are magnets. Here is a list of support and resistance. Trend lines, obviously. Prior highs, prior lows. Measured move targets. Moving averages on any timeframe, plus any type of the major moving averages. For example, on a 5-minute chart, I use a 20 bar exponential moving average. On a daily chart, I use simple moving averages. 50, 100, 150, and 200 bar moving averages. In a bull trend, the low of the entry bar is support. In a bear trend, the high of the sell entry bar is resistance. The buy signal bar high, the bear signal bar low. Entry prices. Scale-in traders exit at prior entry prices, so that's support or resistance. The highest and lowest close of any swing. Profit targets where scalpers would be taking profits. That creates support and resistance. For example, if you're buying in a bull trend and you're scalping, you're going to be selling at a scalp distance above. And that means the market will tend to turn down there, and therefore, it's resistance. The high, the low, the open, and the close from today or yesterday. And on daily, weekly, and monthly charts toward the end of the day, toward the end of the week, toward the end of the month. Support and resistance on those time frames becomes important intraday on a 5-minute chart. For example, in the last hour of the month, if you're trading on a 5-minute chart, you sometimes can find some trades based upon support or resistance on the monthly chart. Daily pivots, I never use those. Big round numbers, like Dow 20,000. Fibonacci retracement levels and projections. I think most traders don't pay much attention to those, and I think they're not helpful. However, 50% pullbacks and 100% measured moves are extremely important, and you'll see them every day. And then, any type of band, which I do not use. In this video, I talked about many other types of support and resistance. In particular, I talked about round numbers and how they can be very helpful. For example, in stocks and commodities, option strike prices are often at round numbers. And because institutions sell the puts and calls and want the puts and calls to expire worthless, they try to have the underlying contracts at the strike prices when the options contracts expire. And since the strike prices are often round numbers, those round numbers are magnets, especially on option expiration days. I then gave a more complete list of things that often provide support and resistance. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the third of five videos on support and resistance. I'm Al Brooks. This will come up from the paper. Once you've missed that, I've learned companies also out there and pre-temp що to the blade. That's definitely not Suああ. And a second rule that plays against load, defense and resistance . Ok, wait, let's click the second rule to GNI Dial. As I said, the only arrow is correct and I can verify it, that's very easy. This is just that the arrow is not properly taco drop down. Because if it comes along with a three支, that's quelsy will get impact it. You and one to come you can view the іSty Midwestern top view range, same one else. From myнымพなんです there... How to move below one hour going toaku if you're classes, and triple kg the plug pole with that to be here4 in. Take some range and 7000�.