 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos on the market cycle. I talked about the first set of definitions in the last video. In this video, I'll be talking a little bit about pullbacks. Next, I'll move on to trading ranges. And finally, I'll talk about trying to construct binary decisions when you're placing trades. Any pause in a trend is a pullback. And it's also a small trading range. And traders expect the trend to resume. If the pullback grows to 20 or more bars, traders start to wonder if the trend will resume or reverse. And at that point, I stop using the term pullback. And instead, I switch to the term trading range. Here, we've got a bold breakout above a wedge-bold flag. Nested wedge. One, two, three. One, two, two, or three. Pretty good bold breakout. And then we've got a pullback here. A pause in the trend. When you see this, chances are this breakout is strong enough for at least a second leg up. So this pause is probably a pullback. Pullback means I expect the trend to resume. So anytime a bar in a trend falls below the low of the prior bar, it's a pullback. We're rallying again here. We've got a bar here. This bar traded below its low. This is a pullback. And the pullback pulled back further to a second leg down. Bear bar, bull bar, and then second leg down. These are pullbacks and bull trends. And I say pullback because the odds are the bull trend will continue. Small wedge. A bear bar. A doji. A bear bar. A bull bar. First leg is here. Second leg here. And then third leg ended with this bull reversal bar. This is actually the start of the pullback even though the bull trend continued higher on this bar. And that's very common that pullbacks begin before the trend ends. Is this high part of this bull trend? Yes. Is this high part of the pullback that began with this bar? Yes. When I look at this chart at this point, I assume the pullback began here. And that this high is part of the pullback and not part of the bull trend. The pullback is any pause. So for example, if I have a bull trend and a bear bar, that is a pullback. Whether or not this low went below that low, I still call it a pullback. In this case, it did go below that low. So most traders would call it a pullback. Pullback can grow. It can grow into a trend reversal. You can see we broke below the bottom of the bull breakout. Once it breaks below a major low like this, traders stop using the term bull trend and say that it's either in a trading range or in a bear trend. I want to say one other thing about this slide. I said earlier this is a wedge bull flag. I think some computers look at this as a pullback from this breakout. Even though this went to a new low, I still, when I look at this, think that this looks like a weaker bear trend than this does a strong bull trend. I tend to look at this as a pullback from this bull breakout, even though the pullback fell below the bottom of the breakout. In a bear trend, typical definition of a pullback is a bar going above the high of the prior bar. So this is the first pullback. However, a smaller timeframe chart, this bull bar is actually almost certainly a pullback. On the five minute chart, I would call it an implied or inferred pullback. It's a pullback, not on this chart, but on some lower timeframe chart. I still view it as a minor pullback. This is an actual pullback on this timeframe because it went above the high of the prior bar. So this is the first bar on this timeframe that actually pulled back above the high of a prior bar in a bear trend. Talked about this a minute ago. Even though this bear channel fell below the bottom of this bull breakout, I still think of this as a pullback from this breakout. And I'm going to look to buy a reversal up. I might not buy above the doji bar, but I might buy above this bull bar or wait for that bull bar to close or buy below this bar. A lot of bulls would buy above this wedge, nested wedge, one, two, three, small wedge inside of what appears to be a bigger wedge, one, two, and then three. I talked earlier about definitions of trends and legs and pullbacks and swings. This to me is a bull trend. Here's a 50% pullback, but it has a lot of bear bars and the market probably went always in short. And the profit was probably big enough for a swing profit. So I would call it a bear swing. And any move up or down is a leg. So this is a leg, but it's big enough. I would call it a trend, big enough for a big swing trade. This is a leg down, big enough for the swing short. So I would call it a swing down. You can call it a leg. You can also call it a 50% pullback from this bull trend. And then we got a rally here. Not strong enough for me to be thinking about it as a trend. I'm wondering at this point if it's a bull leg in a trading range. So it's a bull leg in a trading range. It went up far enough for a swing profit. So you could also call it a bull swing. And then likewise, we went down far enough for a swing profit. Clearly not a bear trend. We're not even making lower lows. We went down for a lot of bars, enough for a swing profit. I'd call it a bear swing. Or you can call all of these legs, bull leg, and then a couple of bear legs in a trading range, and a bull leg in a trading range. And they subdivide. Within it, there are smaller legs. Here's a little bear leg in this bull swing. And it's also a pullback from this beginning bull trend. Just like we have a bull trend here. Four or five bars up, and then a pullback to a higher low, 50% retracement of the rally. This is a pullback in a bull trend. This is a pullback in a bear trend. The trend continued down. Now I'm going to talk a little bit about trading ranges. A trading range can be a single bar. This is a one bar trading range. That's a one bar trading range. If I think the trading range is so small and so insignificant to not alter the course of the bars to the left, I call it a pullback. So in other words, this is a small trading range, a one bar trading range, but it's not enough of a pause or interruption in the bear trend to make me think the bear trend has ended. I think the bear trend is going to continue down. So anytime there's a trading range and I think the trend is going to continue, I call that trading range a pullback. Trading range usually has to go to 20 or more bars before traders start to question trend resumption and they start thinking about a possible trend reversal. Pretty strong reversal up, micro double bottom, down, up, down, and cell climax. When you look at it, do you think that this is a bear flag, a pullback? Do you think that we're going to go down or you think, oh, that's a pretty big bar up. I'm a little bit confused. So big down, big up. Plus we went up and down on this bar and then up again. So when you look at that, are you thinking pullback or are you thinking confusion? If you're thinking confusion, that is one of the hallmarks of a trading range. Now we have three bull bars, one, two, three, closing on their highs. Do you think this is a pullback and that the bear trend will resume down? Or are you saying that's a lot of buying pressure after a sell climax? Probably the market is more likely to go sideways or even up than it is to go down. Bears want more information before they'll sell again. And therefore the trading range will probably grow to more bars. After about 20 bars, the bulls and bears become just about equal, equally balanced. The market's neutral and then it's in breakout mode. 50% of the time the first breakout fails like here. We have a triangle or a tight trading range. We have a bull breakout that fails. And ultimately a breakout up or down, 50% chance it'll be up, 50% chance it'll be down. But after about 20, 30, 40 bars, the probability of trend resumption down becomes the same as the probability for trend reversal up. So, I talk all the time about the market cycle. The reason I do is because I trade each part of the cycle differently. So they each offer different trading opportunities. You can enter on pretty much any bar on any chart. A lot of websites make it sound like you have to wait for this perfect entry or this perfect trade. There is no perfect trade. There is no perfect entry. Institutions are trading on every bar. Every one of these bars has a lot of volume. And waiting for the perfect setup is nonsense. Waiting for a good setup is good. But the reality is institutions are buying and institutions are selling all day long on every bar. And the volume is big on every bar, on every chart. And the purpose of this course is to try to give you ways to get in. You know the market is going up or going down or going sideways and you're trying to figure out how to get in. So I talk a lot, especially in the second half of the course on how to trade, I talk a lot about how to get into the market. And then once you're in, how to manage. Markets always have scary stuff going on like this and like that. And you know, the market crashes every day. If this is one minute chart or five minute chart, it's a crash. If this was a monthly chart and you saw that, you say, yeah, that's a crash. Well, crashes are really common on smaller timeframe charts. And they really do not mean anything. And a lot of times they're just legs inside of trading ranges. Every chart can be made of breakouts, channels and trading ranges. And I trade each part differently. And it's important for me to look at a chart and be able to figure out what the market is doing right now. And that determines how I trade. So when I see this or this, am I buying? No, it's a strong bear breakout. I'm only going to sell. Only about 10% of the bars on a chart are in a strong breakout. And 90% of the bars on every chart are either in a trading range or in a channel. Here we've got a bull breakout. I'm only interested in buying at that point. And then this is a trading range. In fact, the entire chart is a trading range. And once it's clearly in a trading range, I tend to switch to limit order trading, buying below bars and scalping, selling above bars and scalping. This is still a bull channel. We're getting higher lows and higher highs, but it's also in a trading range. I mentioned that a lot of times it's easier to make decisions if you structure the decision as a binary decision. Binary means two. You want to give yourself just two choices. So for example, you look at a part of the chart right here and you ask yourself, first off, is it a trend or a trading range? And if it's a trend, is it a channel or a breakout? So this is a bull trend and has pullbacks. So it's a channel. Is the channel tight or broad? And we're getting a reversal. Is it minor or major? Bull bars, but not great follow through after bull bars. Where are the consecutive big bull trend bars? That makes this more likely a bull leg and what will end up as a trading range. There's disappointment after every bull bar. Bull bar, bear bar. Trying to break out, disappointing. Trying to break out, disappointing. And we have a lot of bear bars in this rally. Closing on the low, closing on the low. Decent sized bodies closing on their lows. So this is probably a bull leg and what will end up as a trading range. Breakouts are followed by pullbacks almost immediately. Some of the pullbacks are lasting four or five bars. Bears are making money selling above bars. So sell above this bar, sell more higher, gets back to this point. They get out break even on their first entry and a profit on their second entry. So it's stair stepping up. Sell this high, sell more higher. It gets back to that first entry, buy break even at your first entry and with a profit on your second. A lot of bear bars, a lot of overlap. So it's a stair type channel. Limit order bears are making money. So this is probably a bull leg and what will soon become a trading range. So it's a bull channel, but probably not going to last much longer before it converts into a trading range. Because the trading range might be coming soon, a lot of the bulls will scalp. The bears are clearly scalping. They're selling new highs, selling more higher. Or instead of selling new highs, they simply sell higher and then buy back at the breakout point. So this is a breakout right here. But is the entire thing a breakout or is it a tight channel? We have two bars in the pullback. It still could be part of the breakout, but then we get another pullback here. So I think this is a channel. Is it tight or broad? It's fairly tight. Pullback just one bar. Pullback just a couple of bars. I only want to buy. Look at this low. Look at that high. The gap is open. Look at this low. Look at that high. Gap is open. So we're still getting open gaps and pullbacks only a couple of bars. So a tight bull channel. If you draw a line below and a line above, the lines are both fairly close together. So a tight bull channel. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe. I'm only looking to buy. Same thing with this bear trend. Bear trend. Lower lows, lower highs. And the pullbacks. One bar, one bar. Three bars, three bars. And the channel, if I were to draw lines, it would be fairly tight. Yes, we're overlapping. It's stair stepping down and bulls are making money. So they buy this low and try to scalp out. But the channel is very tight. In general, when it's tight like this, I'd rather only be selling. And usually I try to sell about halfway up. So here's a bear leg. When it gets around halfway up, I sell. If you cannot tell if the channel is broad or tight, assume that it's tight and only trade in the direction of the trend. So bear trend. You only want to sell. Reversals. We have a couple of legs down and we are reversing up. Is this a major or minor reversal? Is it going to be a major reversal into a bull trend or a minor reversal into a bear flag or a trading range? In general, when the channel down is very tight, any reversal is probably minor, which means a bull leg in a trading range or a bull leg in a bear channel. So if you're buying a minor reversal in a bear trend, it's better only to be scalping. So a strong bull breakout, I only want to look to buy. And I can scalp or swing and I buy for any reason. I buy bull closes. I buy at the market. I buy above bars. I buy above this bar. I buy below bars, below that bar, betting that the bear reversal will fail. And then the market converted into a fairly broad bear channel. This sell off is strong enough. So some traders would say it's always in short. This sell off lasted 15, 20 bars. It's a broad bull channel. And when it's a broad bull channel, it's bull. It's a type of bull trend. So you certainly want to be looking to buy, but because the pullbacks are deep, you can also sell. You can either sell the high and scale in higher or sell at least a scalp distance above that high, looking for the market to pull back to that high. And then you scalp up. Bears are making money selling in a bull trend. And that usually means that the trend is going to evolve into a trading range fairly soon. Trading range, big up, big down, big confusion. So sideways. Traders will try to buy in the bottom third, sell in the top third. Bulls will buy down here. Bears will buy down here as well. So they sell near the top and they buy near the bottom. They sell near the top. And if it goes low enough, they buy. So bears sell near the top. And then they buy back their shorts at the bottom. Bulls look to buy near the bottom and they sell out of their longs near the top. So both bulls and bears are selling high. Both bulls and bears believe the market is not going to go very far up or down. So they take quick profits. When a trading range is this tight and the bars are this small, there's no profit potential. Not even with limit orders. And I think traders should not trade in a very tight range like that. In this video, I talked more about pullbacks. And then I talked about definitions within a trading range. Legs, swings, pullbacks. And finally, I talked about trying to create binary decisions. When you're deciding how to trade, it's good to be able to quickly decide. Is it a breakout? I only want to buy. Is it a tight channel? Tight bull channel? I only want to buy. Is it a tight bear channel? I only want to sell. Is it a broad channel? I can buy and sell. Or is it a trading range? I can buy and sell. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos on the market cycle. Goodwill. Mmm. Goodwill, Slimane. Godokes. What are these times? Conditions are diminishing. Ac geht in an opinion. Move. Please do not essen for me. I love to pick. Which is great. The one's please go next to Al. Can you listen to me? juicy in mind.50qin Wanna Apple channel is on Instagram with Oliver Carey K跑irok at Twitter Sounds about $5. It's about thefire channel. They're more constrained. It's about a Rebecca. Up I'm again wanting to rest. I could definitely see myself. I'm really concerned.