 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth of six videos on trading the open. I'm going to begin by talking about what can happen after gap openings up or down. When I say a gap, I mean a gap above or below the final bar of yesterday, not necessarily a gap above yesterday's high or low. And then next I want to talk about some common flag type patterns, bull flags and bear flags that develop in the first hour. Gaps are targets and gaps can mean different things. For example, a gap can be above yesterday's high or it can be simply above the final bar of yesterday or yesterday's close like this. Or here it's very hard to see, but there's a little gap up on the open today compared to yesterday's close. A small gap above the final bar of yesterday. And gaps are magnets. For example, here the open of today is above yesterday's high. So there's a gap from today's open to yesterday's high. And then the market pulled back a little bit on the open. And then there's a gap from the low of today to yesterday's high. Also, if there's a gap between today's open and today's low and the high of any prior day, that is also a gap in a magnet and the bearers will try to close it. There's a gap from this close from yesterday and today's open and today's low. It's also a magnet. The bearers will try to get a sell off down not only below yesterday's high, but down to the next gap, the high of that final bar or the close of yesterday. Here we gapped up on the open. So today's open is a gap above the high of the final bar of yesterday and above yesterday's close, but not above yesterday's high. We pull back on the open. So the opening low now has a gap above the final bar of yesterday and yesterday's close. And we sold off strongly here, but reversed up again. And after this reversal, we can see there's a gap below the low of the day and the high of that final bar and yesterday's close. These are magnets below. The market got drawn down to the magnet, but was unable to close the gap because the bulls were too strong. Very hard to see the gap open today. The low of the first bar is above the high of the final bar of yesterday and that created a gap. Whenever there's a gap up, it's a breakout. And as you know, breakouts on the open have a 50% chance of reversing. Here we have a gap up and we've got a bull trend. Here we have a gap up and we've got a bear trend. In general, the bigger the gap up, the more likely there's going to be a trend day. And the bigger the gap up, if there's going to be a trend day, more likely it'll be a bull trend day. But basically it's 50-50 on the open. 50-50 chance the breakout will succeed. 50-50 chance it'll fail. You can't spend a lot of time looking at the gap and then looking at the news and trying to analyze whether the news is really bullish and you're going to get a trend up. You can't do that. Just be stupid. If it's a gap up and you've got a bunch of bear bars, you've got to sell betting up. We're going to reverse down. If it's a gap up and you get a bunch of bull bars, you look to buy betting up, you're going to get a trend up. A lot of times when there's a gap, the market simply goes sideways. I would say half the time it goes sideways. 25% of the time you get a bear trend, 25% of the time you get a bull trend. When it's sideways, it begins either as a bull or bear trend and then reverses. For example, here you've got a bull trend and then a bear trend and then a bull trend. It just keeps reversing. And that's by definition a trading range day. We have a big gap up. The bears tried to sell off, could not get below the low of the open, and then we reversed up strongly. For me, this is a bull trend and a double bottom bull flag near the moving average and a reasonable buy either by the close of this bull bar or the close of the bull bar. The second bar, which is also a bull bar, follow through bar. You could buy above the bear bar, but most traders do not like to buy above bear bars with stops. We have a big gap up, a bear bar on the first bar. We went above the first bar and then down again. So now we have consecutive bear bars on the open, one of them with a pretty big bear body. It's a micro double top. We went down, we went up, and then we're down again. It's a reasonable sell, hoping for a high of the day, and it turned out the bears got a huge bear trend day. Micro double top. We gapped up. We sold off on the first bar. We went above the first bar on the second bar and reversed down. Micro double top. The second bar did not have to go above the first for it to be a micro double top. It just had to go up and then down. We have a gap up and a bull trend. No, we have a reversal. We have a bear trend. No, we have a double bottom and then we have a bull trend. This is a trading range day after a big gap up. At the time of the gap up, you don't know it's going to be a trading range day. You just know you have a big bull bar and you have a bull follow through bar. And therefore it's a reasonable buy taking a chance that we get a bull trend. Now it's reversing down and it's reversing down from a micro double top. It's a possible fail breakout above yesterday's high. And it's a reasonable short betting the bull trend will reverse into a bear trend. After four consecutive bull bars like this, I would not take that short. I would wait for a bigger double top before shorting. Probably there are buyers below and the bulls will try again, which they did here from a higher low. So if you get out here below the micro double top, you could buy again here and then you have a double top bear flag or a triangle. Bears will sell here for a fail breakout if they take the sell. Now we have a double bottom at the moving average with a good bull bar. You buy again. Typical trading range open. You're repeatedly reversing. Gap down. Same logic applies. A gap down is a breakout on the open 50% of breakouts reverse. You can get a gap down in a bear trend day. You can get a gap down in a bull trend day. Today, this gap was below the entire prior day. On the daily chart, this would be a gap down. This would be the high of the day, the top of the gap, and the bottom of the gap would be yesterday's low. The close of the day, yesterday. The low of the closing range. So there's a gap from yesterday's low. There's a gap from yesterday's close. There's a gap from the low of the closing range. Those are all gaps and all of them are magnets if the market reverses. Low of the day. As soon as today opens, traders see the gap below yesterday's low. But there are also gaps below yesterday's close and gaps below the final bar of the closing range. Here's the high of the opening range. And now there's a gap from the high of the opening range to yesterday's low, to yesterday's close, and to the low of the final bars of the closing range. And then the high of the day. Now we have a gap between the high of the day and all of those magnets above. Here we have a gap down, but not below yesterday's low, which is way down here. The gap down is simply below the final bar of yesterday and below yesterday's close. Gap down and we got a trend from the open, bare trend. This gap is difficult to see. This is yesterday. And then today opened a little bit below yesterday, but within yesterday's range. It's still a gap. We have several days with gaps down. A gap down, 50% chance any breakout is going to reverse on the open. So a gap down has 50% chance of leading to a bare trend. 50% chance you'll get a gap down and reverse. A lot of times the market just goes sideways. So it tries to reverse and then reverses back down and goes sideways. So we've got two reversals or more and then a trading range. We have a very big gap like this. The odds are higher that you're going to get a trend day. And if you do get a trend day, the odds are higher that it'll be a bare trend instead of a bull trend. Not much higher, but a little bit higher. Here it turned into a bull trend for the first several hours. Big gap down and then a big bear bar. And you say, oh my gosh, there's terrible news out there. The market has to go down. No, you trade what you see. You see a big gap down and you see reversal and then you see two big bull bars. It doesn't matter that the big gap down means there's some bearish news. The market is telling you the market believes the market is cheap and it's going higher. So don't think too much about what the news is and don't think too much that the big gap is bearish. The market's going up. You have to buy. Here we have a gap down. We tried to reverse up. The reversal failed and we have a micro double top and we got a trend from the open bear trend. Traders will sell the neckline of the micro double top, which is below the low of the second bar. We went down on the first bar, up on the second, and now we're going down again. We have a big gap down and a big bear bar, but then an immediate reversal up. So a two bar reversal. Bulls will buy above the high of that bull bar or they'll buy a close here or they'll buy above the high of that bull bar. They'll be able to buy above the low here. They'll be able to buy above the close bull trend for the first half of the day. Once you have the reversal up to a new high, most traders would raise their stop from below the low of the day to below the low of this pullback bar. Big gap down reversed up and now it has a double bottom reversing up. However, now it has a double top and you have to assume it's going to reverse down. This is a trading range open where you typically get both a double bottom and a double top. A lot of times you end up buying here. You're buying again there. You're selling there. You're selling again here. Very often you'll have to take multiple entries before you get one that leads to a swing trade. Double top bear flag, a double top just below the moving average. Bear bar closing in as low. Reasonable sell looking for a swing down. We have a failed bear breakout and then a failed bull breakout twice and the day became a trading range day. What do you notice here? We gap up above yesterday's close. We don't know if it's above yesterday's high because we cannot see the bars to the left, but we're gapping up below the final bar of yesterday and above yesterday's close and above the moving average. First bar, not a bear body. And then we have a pretty good bull bar and then another bull bar and another bull bar. When you see a day that has a lot of big bull bars early on, you know one thing. The odds are it's not going to be a bear trend day. It's either going to be a trading range day or a bull trend day. And therefore it's good to start to buy early. We have an attempt to reverse with this bear bar. So it's a pullback. You can buy above the high of the bar or you can simply buy closes or you could buy with a stop above any pullback here, here, here or second entry here. It looks like a weak rally because you have a big bull bar and then a doji, a couple of bull bars and another doji. So you're getting bad follow through, but you're getting gaps. The market tried to reverse here, but it went back up. And the low of this bar is above the high of that bar. So there's a gap. And then here it tried to reverse. And this low fell just a little bit above that high. So there's a little bit of overlap, a negative gap. And same here, a gap or a negative gap. And when you see a rally where you have good bull bars with bad follow through, you think bull leg in a trading range. However, if you also see gaps and negative gaps, that's a sign of very strong bulls and the market is probably going higher. And it's probably a small pullback bull trend. Tight trading range, middle of the day, possible final flag. We got a final breakout and then a bear bar. Traders will exit betting this is the final bull flag and we might get profit taking into the end of the day. Or they'll wait for two or three bear bars and then exit on the close of those bear bars. Big gap up. And a good bull bar, good follow through bar. Reasonable to go long. But then a bear bar, closing there is slow. Better to get out of longs there. And traders will look to sell, betting that we'll probably get down near the moving average. And this may be the high of the day. You can sell below the bear bar or you can wait for three or four bear bars and then sell closes. Or you can sell with a limit order above the high of the prior bar, especially if it's a bear bar. Whenever you see three, four, five pretty good bear bars early in the day, the odds are today is not going to be a bull trend day. It'll either be a trading range day or a bear trend. It was a bear trend for the first 15 bars or so. And then it reversed up. Whenever you have a big sell off like this about the size of an average day's range and you get a reversal, usually the market has a hard time getting much above the high of the day. And it usually closes somewhere off the high and around the high of the opening range. This ended up as a big doji bar on the daily chart. It opened here and it closed a little bit above. This is a big trading range day. It's a reversal day and a big swing down and a big swing up. But it closed somewhere around the middle. And it's actually just a big trading range day. And these early bear bars made a big bull trend unlikely. We got a big bull swing, but we could not get much above the high of the day, the early high of the day. We could not close much above it either. Consecutive bull bars on the open and then three bear bars going below the low of the first bar. Room to the moving average. Probably going at least a little bit lower. And this might be the high of the day. Reasonable to sell the close. The bulls tried to get a wedge reversal up here. Very tight channel. A lot of big bear bars. Traders are not going to take that first buy. And then we had a big bear breakout here. You'd expect a second leg down and we got it. And then we reversed up from just below yesterday's low. This is a consecutive parabolic wedge pattern. A consecutive complex bottom. We tried to form a wedge bull flag here. Bull breakout. Pull back to the moving average. Decent buy signal bar. So wedge bull flag. 50% pullback from this. It failed. And then we got another breakout and another parabolic wedge. Reversal up. Reversal up. Reversal up. Very good bull bar. This is a good candidate for at least a couple of legs up. Maybe the low of the day. Traders will buy above its high. Or they'll buy a pullback above a good bull bar here. Maybe above a bull bar here. This is a triangle or a wedge. Three legs down. One pullback. Two pullback. And then three. Reasonable buy. Stop below here. Hoping for a swing up. Reversal day. Higher or low. Major trend reversal. Gap down. Small bull bar. With a tail on top. Not very good for the bulls. And then a pair of pretty good bear bars. At this point we're always in short. Probably going at least a little bit lower. When you see three, four or five good sized bear bars on the open. The odds are today is either going to be a bear trend day. Or a trading range day. Not a bull trend day. Second consecutive good bear bar. New low of the day. Reasonable bull bar. The bull bar. The bull bar. With a tail on top. Not very good for the bulls. And then a pair of pretty good bear bars. At this point we're always in short. Probably going at least a little bit lower. When you see three, four or five good sized bear bars on the open. The odds are today is either going to be a bear trend day. Or a trading range day. Not a bull trend day. Second consecutive good bear bar. New low of the day. It's reasonable to sell the close. Or sell with a limit order at the high of that bar. Sold off. And then sideways. You can say the trading range began here. I think the trading range began here or here. Sell off. Trading range. The market then decides whether to get trend reversal up. Or trend resumption down. Traders will work for reversals. They'll look to buy near the bottom. And they'll look to sell near the top. Big gap down. But then bull trend. Bull bar closing near its high. And then another bull bar. Markets probably always in long and going higher. And then you get a third or fourth, fifth bull bar. Somewhere in here, the odds were that today would not be a bear trend day. It'd either be a bull trend day, which it was. Or it would simply go sideways in a trading range. Traders would buy the close of the first or second bar. Or they'll start buying above the high of the first bar. Or above the high of the second bar. Looking for the market to close the gap below yesterday's low. Maybe get up to the moving average. Maybe get up to yesterday's close. By the third or fourth bar, it was likely that this was going to be a bull trend. Strong rally and then a trading range for many hours. A breakout mode setup for either trend resumption up to market. resumption up tomorrow, or trend reversal down tomorrow. This is a failed breakout below yesterday's low with a decent buy signal bar. It's a reasonable buy. And then we got a trend from the open bull trend. The market often forms bull flags or bear flags on the open double bottoms, wedges. And I wanna talk a little bit about that. Here we have a big gap up and a rally, another sell off with eight bear bars in here. Yet we have a bull bar at the moving average. This is bearish. The bears own a lot of bars here. However, it's a big gap up. And this pullback is about a 50% pullback of this rally. It's a test of the moving average. And it's a double bottom with this low. And we have a good buy signal bar. It's reasonable to buy above its high. We tried to break to the upside here. We pulled back. Reasonable to buy above this high. Looking for a new high of the day. And maybe a measured move up. I call this a double bottom bull flag. Gap up. We rallied here. Failed. Rallied again. Failed. And now we have a third reversal attempt near the moving average with a good looking bull bar. That's a reasonable buy. We have a bull trend, including the gap up and a pullback into a wedge bull flag. And then we have a third reversal attempt near the moving average with a good looking bull bar. That's a reasonable buy. We have a bull trend, including the gap up and a pullback into a wedge bull flag just above the moving average. the moving average. Sometimes it's easier to see the wedge if you simply connect the low of the first bar and the third bar. Even if the second bar goes below the low of the line. That's okay. If you buy on a stop above the high of that good looking bull bar, you put your protective stop just below. When there is a very strong rally on the open like this, it's common for the market to go sideways for hours. Sometimes you'll get trend resumption up or trend reversal down later in the day. Also we have an early trading range here and then a brief breakout three, four or five bars that often leads to a trending trading range day. We have a lower range, a brief breakout, and then an upper range. And you trade this like a trading range by low, sell high and scalp. We have a small gap down and then we rallied, we paused and we rallied again. Right below the moving average. For the bears, this is a double top. We have the high of the day here, we sold off. We're testing that high and we're selling off again. You can call it a wedge if you want. You can call it a failed breakout above a double top with here and here. I would simply call this a double top bear flag. So we are selling off. We have a gap down. We have a high of the day here and a second high here. You can sell either below the bull bar or some traders prefer to sell below bear bars. So maybe below here hoping for a swing down. Possible high of the day. In general, higher probability to sell below bear bars. And if you sell a follow through bar after a bear breakout. So the close of that bear bar. Gap down and then we rallied. But here's the high of the day. We went to a new high and we went to another new high. Therefore this is a type of wedge. It's a pullback from the sell off. It's about a 50% pullback of this sell off. It's a test of the moving average and it has a bear sell signal bar. This is a wedge bear flag after a gap down. So bear trend and then a wedge rally. One, two, three. And then a bear sell signal bar all below the moving average. Reasonable sell for a swing down. I'll begin by talking about gap openings. And gaps can be anything. They could be a gap completely above or below yesterday's high or low. Or they could simply be a gap above or below the final bar of yesterday. It's important to think of a gap as a breakout. And a breakout on the open has about a 50% chance of reversing. If there's a big gap, there's a slightly higher probability that there'll be a trend in the direction of the gap. So a huge gap down, slightly more likely if there's going to be a trend, it'll be down. If there's a huge gap up, slightly more likely if there's going to be a trend, then it will be up. On the open, the market often enters a trading range. And that trading range can become a flag. For example, if you have a gap down and you have a rally up to the high of the day near the moving average, you can have a double top bear flag for a possible high of the day. If you get a couple legs up, it can be a wedge bear flag and possible high of the day. If you get a gap up and a rally initially, and then a pullback to around the low of the day and a moving average and around a 50% pullback of the entire move, that can be a double bottom bull flag. If you have a gap up and a rally, and then a couple legs down near the moving average 50% pullback, that can be a wedge bull flag in the start of a bull trend day. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth of six videos on trading the open. This is Staff News Podcast. I'm Jeff glowing your Roma Five Five Five Five Five Five Five Sりました. This is a market where we're more 얼�ist to sign anịt Sprant, so we're going to show limestone every better. Best of allouch's into trading the rep. I need to buy quy compr題 when you're almost at among the first mets. I need to buy wall sheep swap, so you preach privilege of short in hair, so that its business