 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on trading in the middle of the day. After the initial hour or two of the day, traders start to look for some kind of a change. Is a bull trend becoming a trading range? Is the trading range breaking out up or down? If there is an initial trend up or down, traders need to decide if it looks like it's a leg or down. Like it's a leg within a trading range or the start of an actual trend. Every market has three parts to the market cycle. A bull trend, a bear trend, and a trading range. Most days change behavior after the first one to three hours. That is the end of the opening range, the opening third of the day, and the start of the middle of the day, or middle third of the day. It's not really thirds. It's not like each segment is two hours long. It's that after the first one to three hours, the market changes behavior. And then toward the end of the day, the final hour or two, it often changes behavior again. Because most days change behavior at least once, traders always have to be ready to change how they're going to trade. Here we have a bull trend on the open, but it became a bear trend in the middle of the day. Here we have a bear trend on the open, and it became a bull swing lasting a couple of hours. A tight trading range, and then the bear trend resumed. The entire day ended up as a broad bear channel with lower lows and lower highs, and the market was actually always in long a couple times during the day. That's one of the features that distinguishes a broad channel from a tight channel. A broad channel, a broad bear channel often is always in long for part of the day. We have an early trading range, and then a bull trend. We have a trading range, and then a bear trend. And you trade them differently. When it's in a trading range, you trade it one way, looking to buy low, sell high, take quick profits. And once it starts to become a trend, either down or up, you look to swing part or all of your trade. Trading range on the open continued sideways for most of the day, became a bear trend late in the day. We have an early strong sell off. And then it became a trading range for most of the day. And at the end of the day, had a small reversal up. Always be prepared to trade what the market is currently doing. And always be prepared for a transition into a different style of trading. And then trade appropriately for what the market is doing. Middle of the day, sometimes it's a third of the day, sometimes it's less than a third of the day. Sometimes it's more than a third. After the market does something on the open, here a bull trend, it transitions into something else. You have to be prepared for the transition and then trade appropriately. Bulls tried to get a late rally, but it became a small wedge bear flag, and the bear trend resumed at the end of the day. But the end of that behavior that takes place in the middle of the day can fail or can continue. You only change how you're trading if the market changes what it's doing. Here the bulls tried to get a reversal up. So rally sell off. They tried to get a reversal up. Instead, it became a wedge bear flag and the bear channel continued. The market was sideways for most of the day, and then it tried to break out into a bull trend late in the day, but it failed. The bears looked to sell after the reversal down, looking for a sell off into the close. The final third of the day often begins with a breakout one way or the other. Here we have an upside breakout, and then we also had a downside breakout. First two-thirds of the day sideways, and then we have a breakout, and that breakout began the final segment of the day, the final third of the day. The bulls tried to get a wedge bottom here to end the middle third of the day and begin the final part of the day. It failed, and then they got another wedge bottom attempt here. Once they had this strong reversal, they started to look to swing part or all of their trade, looking for a trend up into the close. Here there was profit taking at the end of the day. A wedge bottom, two consecutive good bull bars, looks like the start of a possible swing up. First two-thirds of the day was the trading range, but then we have a big bear breakout, consecutive big bear bars, a third, fourth bear bar. It looks like we're going down for at least a measured move based upon the height of that range. It turned out to be a strong trend for most of the remainder of the day. Trading range for most of the middle of the day, and then a brief breakout at the end of the day. Very little opportunity to make money for the bulls at the end of the day. Once it was clearly long, it went sideways. Very strong trend. Is it strong enough to last for the remainder of the day? Here, a very strong bear trend. Is it strong enough to last for the remainder of the day? Well, only a couple days a month, you see a bull trend day that looks like this. Only a couple days a month, you see a bear trend day that looks like this. A small pullback bear trend, very small pullbacks, and the trend lasts all day. This happens a couple days a month, about 10% of the time. 90% of days that begin with a strong trend either lead to a trading range or an opposite trend. And therefore, you have to be prepared for some kind of a transition. Begin as a strong bull trend, but then convert it into a strong bear trend. Sometimes you'll have a very strong trend that is so strong that it's unsustainable. And here, there's a parabolic wedge top. Different ways to draw it, but three pushes up. One, pullback two, pullback three, and then four. We're getting a bull breakout above a very tight bull channel. It's too strong, and it could be a climactic end of the rally. Very strong bear trend, but we got a reversal, and then a higher low major trend reversal. Sell climax, pause, sell climax, sell climax, pause, sell climax. A series of sell climaxes. Sometimes it's just too much selling for it to continue. No one left to sell at that price. And once the final weak bear has sold, and the final weak bull has given up, all that's left are the strong bulls, and they're going to buy. The strong bears don't want to sell down here. They want to sell up here or up here. And then all we're left with are strong bulls looking for a rally. We had an II final flag, two inside bars inside that bar. When you have an II and a strong sell off, it often becomes the final bear flag, especially after a series of sell climaxes. This breakout, bear breakout, is strong enough to get at least a small second leg down. But in a series of sell climaxes like this, there's a significant risk that it's going to be the final leg down, and we'll get a reversal either into a trading range or into an opposite trend. We have a strong bear bar, but it's followed by a bull bar. Another strong bear bar, followed by a bull bar. Strong bull bar, followed by a bear bar. Strong bull bar, followed by a bear bar. We're getting strong trend bars up and down, but terrible follow through. And that usually means the market is balanced. Neither side can maintain control. And the result usually is the conversion into a trading range. Bad follow through after trend bars up and down. That's more common when the rally is going to end up as a bull leg in a trading range, or it'll lead to a trading range. A trading range day has at least one leg down and one leg up. Either one can come first. Here we have a leg up and a leg down. Here we have a leg down and a leg up. This turned out to be a bear reversal day and a bear trend day. However, if it stopped going down here, it would have remained as a trading range day. Big up, big down, big confusion and sideways. Here the bears were strong enough to get a trend down. Only 10% of the days trend strongly from the open and trading range. Only from the open until the close. Even if the day is a strong trend day, it usually ends up having a trading range somewhere in the middle of the day. Strong trend early on. Lots of good bull bars. Not much in terms of pullback. And then the market went sideways for the middle of the day. Odds favor resumption of the bull trend. But once a trading range lasts 20 or more bars, the probability of a resumption up starts to fall close to 50%. It's still better than 50-50 that we're going to go up. But it's close to 50-50 that if we get a breakout, it could be down. Same thing. Strong rally trading range. Strong rally trading range. After the first 5 or 10 bars, the probability is 60% or more that we're going higher. But once you start to get 10 or 20 bars, it becomes close to 50-50. Strong sell-off. A bear flag. But then we went sideways. The odds favored more down. But once you start to get 20 bars or so, it becomes equally likely that we're going to reverse up as it is that we're going to continue down. It's still always slightly more likely that the trend will resume. But the more bars that get added, the closer and closer the probabilities get to be 50-50 that the breakout will be up versus down. Same thing here. Bear trend. Bear flag. Pretty good reversal, but still possibly a bear flag up here. Wedge bear flag. 1, 2, 3. But mostly sideways for 30 or 40 bars. Breakout mode. Breakout mode. All of these are breakout modes. Looking for trend resumption or trend reversal. Once it's sideways for 30 or 40 bars, the probability is probably 50-50 that you'll get trend reversal instead of trend resumption. Here we get trend resumption up in the final third of the day. And here we got trend reversal down. Bull trend, trading range, trend reversal down in the final third of the day. Here we got a little bit of trend resumption down, but it stayed mostly sideways. And here we got a strong breakout and some trend resumption up late in the day. When I see a reversal day like this down and then up, and it does not get much above the open, I think of it as a trading range day. Weak bull trend on the open. Bull breakout, but tail. Bad follow through. Bull breakout. Bad follow through. Doji bars. Bear bars. And the same here. Bad follow through after bull bars. Big bull bar. And bad follow through. More bull bars. Doji. Doji. Bear bar. Bad follow through. Is this more likely a bull trend? Or is it more likely a bull leg in what will become a trading range? No pull backs here. Small pull back here. Small pull back here. And look at this. This flow did not fall below the breakout point. There's a gap. trend or is it more likely a bull leg in what will become a trading range? No pullbacks here. Small pullback here. Small pullback here. And look at this. This low did not fall below the breakout point. There's a gap. This low did not fall below the buy signal bar high. A gap. There are bear bars but they're not particularly big. Small pullbacks. Not many bear bars. Not big bear bars. And gaps. Even though it looks like a weak rally because of the bad follow through, it could be a small pullback bull trend day. And now every bar is gapping. The close of this bar above the high of the prior bar. And now we have a series of bars closing above their midpoints or on their highs. This is becoming a strong bull trend. Small pullback bull trends are one of the strongest types of trends and they can last all day. Compare that with this. We have a deeper pullback here. Deep pullback here. Big bear bar. Big bear bar. Several decent bear bars. And this pullback fell below that breakout point. Broke through a new high. Pulled back below. There's a breakout. Pulled back below that breakout. Broke out above here. Pulled back below. Broke out above here. Pulled back below. Broke out above here. Pulled back below. Broke out above here. Pulled back below. Every breakout is pulling back and therefore limit order bears can make money selling in this bull trend. That makes it more likely a bull leg in a trading range and less likely a bear trend that will last all day. Because every breakout pulls back below the breakout point, the bears are betting that the bull breakouts will fail and pull back far enough for the bears to make money. When it's easy for the bears to make money in a bull trend, the bull trend is more likely a bull leg in what will become a trading range. And this evolved into a trading range for the remainder of the day. I think it's really important to try to determine whether a rally or a sell-off is a leg in a trading range or the start of a trend. We have bear bars, but where are the consecutive big bear bars? We have a bear bar, small bear bar. Bear bar, small bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, small bear bar, bull bar. This looks more like a bear leg in what would become a trading range than the start of a big bear trend. Became a trading range for 10 or more bars. If this is a five minute chart, that's an hour or more. The pullbacks are small, only going up a bar or two. Negative gap. This pullback overlapped the breakout point by a little bit, so it's still possible that this is a small pullback bear trend day. If this gap stays open, that would increase the chances that we're going to have a small pullback bear trend day. It looks like a weak sell-off. It looks like a bear leg in a trading range. But we have a negative gap here, very little overlap. And then we have an actual gap here. Even though it looks like a bear leg in a trading range, those gaps increase the chances that it's actually a bear leg in what would become a small pullback bear trend day. Eventually, the bulls gave up and the pullbacks became tiny and the market became a very strong bear trend. Strong sell-off on the open, lots of consecutive bear bars, but then really good looking bull bars. Big bull bodies closing on their highs and many of them. If the market's going to be in a bear trend, you don't want to see a lot of big bull bars. That reduces the chances that the bear trend will last all day. Some of the pullbacks lasting five or ten bars, and the market actually looks always in long here and maybe even here as well. Broad bear channel, but a broad bear channel usually evolves into a trading range. Sometimes it'll last several days before it does, but when the buying is this strong, this looks much more like a bear leg in what will become a trading range day. And therefore, traders need to be ready for a reversal into a bull leg in the trading range or a trading range after the bear leg. Broke below this low, reversed up. Broke below this low, reversed up, reversed up, reversing up. Bulls are able to make money all day long, and for the first 30 or 40 bars, not good for the bears. Probably a bear leg in a trading range day. Bulls buying at prior lows and or below prior lows, betting that the bears are going to be unable to create gaps the way they had a gap here. The market reversed up for a couple of hours, and the bear trend became a trading range. If you want, you could still call it a broad bear channel, lower high, lower lows, but I would call all of this a trading range. Certainly this part of the selling was a bear leg in what ended up as a trading range. We have a gap down and then an early trading range. And at this point, it's not clear if the bears will get a resumption down or the bulls will get a reversal up. We have a double bottom, slightly lower low double bottom, decent bull bar, and then three bull bars, bull bar closing on its high, above the high of the past 10 bars or so. Now we have three pushes down, bear bar, bull bar, bear bar, doji, bear bar, bull bar. It's a wedge and it's a higher low. It's probably not enough bars for a major trend reversal, but on the open, the first hour or two, sometimes you'll get major trend reversals that have fewer bars than what you normally would see. At this point, it's probably going to be a minor reversal, but the reversal up here was so strong, traders then started to look for a higher low major trend reversal. I'd never really had a textbook major trend reversal all day, either here or here, yet it continued up as a major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull reversal, everything looks minor, but at this point you have to assume that we're going higher. So traders are looking to buy pullbacks. A minor reversal, a minor reversal became a major reversal. Consecutive bull bars closing on their highs. Three bull bars in a row, four of the past five bars had bull bodies, increases the chances that we're starting to get a reversal up and maybe we'll get back to yesterday's close or maybe have a bull trend day. When it's starting to turn up, it might be attracted to this magnet, yesterday's close and yesterday's low. So this might be the start of a buy vacuum up to test resistance, which it turned out to be. Close far above the breakout point and above the high of the day. Strong enough breakout, so probably at least a second leg up after there's a pullback. And maybe many more legs up, but at least one more leg up. This pair of bull bars closing on their highs with decent sized bodies is a sign that the bears are giving up. They doubt that it's going to be a bear trend. They believe now it's going to go up to yesterday's close and yesterday's low. Therefore, they want to sell higher. So not many traders willing to sell down here. Traders could buy the close of the breakout bar, especially since it's consecutive bars, or they can buy the close of the follow through bar. The minimum that the bulls want on the follow through bar is the absence of a bear body. And here there's a perfect doji. So some bulls will not buy the close of the breakout. They'll wait for the next bar. And if it's not a bear body, they'll buy at the market as soon as that bar closes. Strong enough reversal up. If it's a bull trend, traders do not want it to fall below this low. Therefore, reasonable to put the stop just below the low. Bulls trying to get a double bottom with this little pullback. A double bottom bull flag hoping for trend up. They have a decent bull bar. They can buy above this bull bar. Also, there's a possible gap here. Therefore, this could be the start of a small pullback bull trend day. The bull bar, two legs down, one pullback, two. Possibly a breakout test of this high. And a test of the beginning of this little bull channel. Spike, pause, pullback, channel. Yesterday's close and low are resistance levels. And therefore, they're magnets. They tend to draw the market up there. The bears believe at some point the market's going to get there. And therefore, they'd stop selling. And the market can get up there pretty quickly. And if it breaks strongly through it, the bears still are not going to sell. And will probably go higher. Bulls start to look to buy reversals up. Pullbacks to the moving average. High one, high two. You can call it a triangle, a tight trading range. They'll buy with stops above bars. They'll buy beer closes. They'll buy bull closes. They'll buy below bars. The market's always in long. And the odds are we'll get up at least to yesterday's close. After any strong breakout to a new high like this, traders trail their stop. Is this strong enough here to put your stop here? It probably is. Then another strong breakout here. Traders will raise their stop down here. Strong rally on the open. In fact, exceptionally strong. And whenever you see an exceptionally strong trend right from the open, you have to be thinking that it could be a climactic brief rally that leads to a trading range or a reversal, a parabolic wedge. We have a strong breakout, a little pause, another breakout, pause, and another breakout. So three pushes up. One, and then two or three. Other computers will say one, pullback. Two, pullback. Three. So potential parabolic wedge top here. If computers decide it is, they'll take profits and we'll probably go sideways at least five to ten bars, maybe slightly sideways to down. And possibly we could get a reversal down, which we ultimately did. Getting doji bars, small bodies, three pushes up, one, two, three. Possible parabolic wedge rally and a climactic end of the rally. Expect at least ten bars two legs sideways to down. One, pullback two. I don't know if that's enough. Maybe one, pullback two. I don't know. But once you see this, you've got to be thinking that there's a risk. This is a climactic end of the day and the day could be a reversal day. In other words, it begins as a bull trend and then reverses back down. Bull trend on the open transitioned into a very tight trading range in the middle of the day. Whenever you have a parabolic buy climax and then a tight trading range, or a tight trading range after any bull trend, you've got to be thinking about the possibility of a double top major trend reversal. Here we have a slightly lower low double top within a tight trading range. And then you've got a bear breakout and especially a stronger bear breakout here. It looks like we're probably going to continue down. Strong rally, terrible follow through, disappointing follow through, lots of reversals, lots of dojis, small bars. Confusing, so trading range. Once it lasts 20 or more bars, it's almost a 50-50 chance that if there's a breakout, the breakout is going to be down. When the range is this tight, most traders should not trade. Very difficult to make money, even with limit orders when the range is that tight. Small double bottom bull flag, high one, high two. Reasonable to buy in case we get trend resumption up. About half the time you do get trend resumption up. Half the time you continue sideways. Since it's a bad looking sell below this doji, probably more buyers below. Some traders will buy with a limit order at the low of that bar. Betting against a bear trend after only five bars down. More likely bull flag. Tight trading range. Bulls expect legs up not to go very far, and therefore they're looking to take profits around prior highs. They'll place limit orders to sell out of their longs at the prior high. The bulls will also sell strong bull closes, betting the breakouts will fail, and the tight trading range will continue. The bears know that, and they'll sell as well, knowing the bulls will probably take profits, and the tight trading range will probably continue. Both are scalping. Tight trading range. Bulls want a breakout, measure move up. Bears want a breakout to the downside, and measure move down. However, most of the trading in here is scalping. Until you start to get a reasonably strong breakout, or a very strong breakout. At that point, traders will swing trade part of their position, hoping for a measuring gap, and a measure move down. If the bulls are swing trading in here, it's reasonable to put a stop just below a measure move down. Because the market may go a little bit below the trading range, and then continue in the trading range. For the bears, they know the bulls want to get to a measure move up. However, most of the trading in here is scalping. Until you start to get a reasonably strong breakout, or a very strong breakout. At that point, traders will swing trade part of their position, hoping for a measuring gap, and a measure move down. If the bulls are swing trading in here, it's reasonable to put a stop just below a measure move down. If the bulls are selling, they're betting that the bulls will not get to the measure move up. And therefore, reasonable to put their stop a little bit above, allowing for a little bit of a breakout of the range, and expecting it to fail. It's fairly common for the trading range to continue for the rest of the day. However, you always have to be prepared for a transition into the close, the final third of the day, final couple hours of the day. And here we got a pretty good bear breakout. Once you start to get five, six, seven bear bars like this, the bulls are not going to rely on their stock. They're just going to get out somewhere in here. If they think the bears have clearly won, it does not make sense to hold on to the stock, because if they think the bears have clearly won, they're then 60% certain the market's going to fall for a swing down to at least a measured move. And therefore, you get out as soon as you conclude the bears now have taken control. This is where the final bulls gave up. They're not waiting for the stock to be hit. They've decided that this is reasonably strong. The bull reversal up was weak. Maybe we are going to have a swing down for the remainder of the day. Bears are selling closes. They're selling the break up below the trading range, confident in at least a small second leg down, and maybe a trend for the remainder of the day for a reversal day. Bull trend, bear trend. I call it a trading range day, big up, big down, never fell far below the low of the open. If you want, you can call it a bear trend day. When I see these reversal days, I think of them as trading range days. The bulls were in control for a while. The bears were in control for a while. The bears got a sell off here for a couple of hours. Consecutive bear bars, not all that big. Consecutive bear bars, not all that big. Several dojis and small bars. It looks like a bear leg in a trading range. Also, it's still above yesterday's close and yesterday's low. So this looks like a trading range. We're up, we're down, we're up, we're down. A bear leg, so at some point, it should go up again if this is going to be a trading range. Small, tight trading ranges, TTR, tight trading ranges. It's still a higher low after this big gap up. So possible higher low, major trend reversal. A gap up, so a bull trend, even though you do not see any bar. And a bear channel, bear channel, bull flag, and it's a higher low. This is still a pullback from this reversal up from yesterday's close. Because this is still in a trading range, and it's a weak sell-off, traders have to be ready for a reversal up into a bull leg in the trading range. Sell climax. Late in the range, 20 or more bars in, possibly an exhaustive end of the trend. We may get down to yesterday's close, maybe even a little bit below yesterday's low. But at this point, it's probably not going to be a big bear trend day. Look to the left. We're still within yesterday's range. For the bulls, it's a bear trend, bull breakout, high or low. Micro double bottom. We tried to go up. We went down. We're trying to go up a second time. And we're trying to reverse this sell climax. Sideways for a lot of bars, and then we started getting bull bars closing on their highs. Traders started buying with stops above the bars. They're not expecting a bull trend, even though it's a high or low, major trend reversal. It's a trading range. We're up, we're down, we're up, we're down. We're probably going to go up, we're probably going to go down, we're probably going to go up. Selling off for the first third of the day, bulls are looking for the market to transition into a bull leg. So they're looking to buy. Strong reversal up. They can buy the close, they can buy below bars, they can buy bear closes, and they can buy above bull bars. Good reversal up, trying to find a higher low. At some point in here, you decide that if it's going to be a swing up, it should not fall below this low. So you can put your stop there once you start to see the reversal up. Is it a high probability buy in here? Not really. It's higher probability after you start to see a bull break out and a follow through bar. Stop is further away, either here, here, or here, but the probability gets higher. We have a tight bear channel, bull break out, usually a minor reversal in sideways. But if it starts to continue up, the probability of higher prices goes up. Since this is probably a bear leg in a trading range, it's usually better to enter as early as you can, because you're expecting a bull leg in the trading range and not a big bull trend. And if you enter early, you have more profit potential. Lots of reversals up and down. Lots of overlap. Breakouts are not going very far. Bears are making money selling above bars. Bulls are making money buying below bars. Probably bull leg in a trading range. We're getting a reversal down here after the first couple of hours. It looks like a bull leg in a trading range, and therefore you're expecting a bear leg in a trading range. It often begins around 8.30 or 9.30. This is around 8.30, about 20, 25 bars into the day, and a pretty good bear bar. Even though it does not look strong, if this is a bull leg in a trading range, this could be the start of a bear leg in a trading range, and it could go down for two or three hours. Some traders will sell the close, taking a chance that it's the start of a bear swing. It's a give up bar. Bulls disappointed by the tail here, by the doji here, the bear bars here. We tried to break to the upside and continue up. Instead, we reverse down. Here, the bulls are giving up, thinking that maybe this is the end of the rally, and that now we'll get a swing down. The bears know that, and they'll sell as well. If you sell this close, stop either above the high of this bear bar, or above the high of the early bear leg. The market traded down for about 30 bars. But, the sell-off, even though it had some consecutive bear bars, it had prominent tails, and a lot of bull bars, and the bars were not all that big. And, we did not break strongly below this low. Therefore, it's probably a bear leg in a trading range. Traders will look for a reversal up at the end of the day. Only 10% of the days trend relentlessly from the open, either up or down. Therefore, 90% of the days have some kind of a transition. And, transitions are common after the first two or three hours of the day. Traders, therefore, should always be ready for a transition. Whenever the market is in a trend on the open, let's say a trend up, you have to decide, is it a bull leg in what will become a trading range day? Or, is it the start of a big bull trend? And, the opposite is true of an early sell-off. Is it more likely the start of a bear trend, or is it simply a bear leg in what will become a trading range day? I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on trading the middle of the day.