 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on scalping examples. I'm going to be continuing the chart from the prior video, again discussing scalping setups and management. The M&E sold off in a spike pullback channel and we have a couple bull bars closing near their highs. This is a reasonable swing buy setup. We have an upper trading range, we have a couple reversals, we have a bear breakout and a second leg down, both closing on their highs. The follow through after the reversal is down has been bad. Bear breakout, bull bars. Bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, bull bar. Two, three bear bars, prominent tails, and then a bull bar closing on its high. Another pair of bear bars, bull bar closing on its high. When you have bad follow through like that, the sell off is probably a bear leg in what will become a trading range. A bear leg in a trading range is usually followed by a bull leg in a trading range. Therefore, this is a reasonable swing buy setup. You have a micro double bottom, you have very good buy signal bars, you have a bear breakout and a second leg down, reversing up. And you have an upper trading range, a magnet above. And the sell off has had bad follow through on the way down. However, you do not have to swing trade it. Sometimes it's reasonable for scalpers to take scalps when there's a reasonable swing setup. There are many ways to handle entering here. One is to buy above the high of this bar with a stop. Another is to buy the close of the follow through bar. It has a bull body. Even though it's only a one tick bull body, it's a bull body. So that's reasonable. Some traders will buy with a limit order on the close of this bar or on the close of that bar. A bull scalper looking for a one point scalp. For whatever reason he buys that close, this close, on a stop above this bar. His one point profit target is here, right at the moving average. You'll have bear scalpers who will sell a strong bull close at the moving average, especially given that the follow through was not all that aggressive. It's only a one tick bull doji. So some bear scalpers will sell at the moving average or the close of this bull bar for a scalp down. We have a double top bear flag and we're at the moving average. The close of the bull bar was not above the moving average. And the follow through bar has a bear body. It's a low two short, low one, low two. Every double top is a low two short, but there probably are buyers below this bar because the reverse of this bar is a low two short. Because the reversal up is good enough so that the traders will get at least a second leg up. The probability favors a second leg up. We have three bull bars, two with decent sized bodies closing on their highs. And we have another bar here for a double bottom. If traders buy with a limit order below this bar, their stop is down here. And most traders who take that trade are willing to buy more lower to scale in. A weak sell setup, a double top, but we're probably always in long and we only have a doji sell signal bar. So bulls will buy the low, betting that the sell will fail. And they'll put a stop below the bottom of the bull trend. Remember, the bulls are betting that this is the start of a swing up. And therefore, they need the market to continue to form higher lows. They do not want any sell off here to fall below this low. They believe this is the start of a bull trend and the pullback should not fall below the start of the bull trend. If he's a scalper, he buys that low, places a limit, order to get out one point above, he takes his profit. Bull breakout, a surprisingly big bar. Usually when you get a surprise bar, you'll get at least a small second leg up. We have a bear channel. Usually it evolves into a trading range. It's possible that this is a second leg trap in a trading range. First leg up, pull back, and then a strong breakout, but a lower high, and it could trap bulls into buying high. Probably we're going higher. There's room to the top of the range. And this is a surprise bar, big enough so that even if it does turn out to be a second leg trap, the bulls will probably get at least a small second leg up. Therefore, bulls can buy that close and put a stop either below the biclimax bar or below this minor high or low. However, because the bears have a potential wedge, first push down, second push down, and then a failed breakout above this double top, if we start to reverse that would be a third push down, the bears will sell this close as well. Remember, look to the left. Trading range. Big bull bar, traders made money selling the bull close. Big bear bar, traders made money buying the bull close. Bull breakout, traders made money selling the bull close. A bear bar, outside down, they made money buying the bear close. If you bought this close, you could buy more lower and you were able to get out with a profit. A big bull bar, we went down. Bears made money selling this close. Bulls made money buying this close. A bear breakout. Therefore, with all of the reversals after strong trend bars, the bears will sell this close as well, betting against a sustained strong breakout and the start of a bull trend. You'll bet instead on terrible follow through because, look to the left, every strong trend bar has had terrible follow through. In a trading range, usually bulls and bears can make money buying or selling at any time if they use wide stops and scale in and manage their trades well. This is a good example. Here's the bull case. The bull buys that close. He puts a stop down here, betting that we'll get at least a small second leg up before we get a reversal down. He can buy more one point lower or at the low of this bar, betting against the reversal. And then he places a limit order to get out at his first entry price here, break even on his first buy, and then with a one point profit on his lower buy. He may have had a limit order to buy more, another point lower, or even another point below that, but those orders were not filled. He has to trade small enough so that however many times he's willing to add to his position, if he gets stopped out, the loss is no greater than on any other trade. I said bears can sell that close and make money, and they can. A bear selling that close needs the market to stay below a major lower high. This is a double top. We have a series of bear bars and a new low. This is a major lower high. And therefore bears will sell this close, scale in higher if they have to, looking for a one point scalp. And it fell one point on the very next bar, and they can exit with their one point profit. They were willing to scale in higher if they had to, but if the market immediately goes their way, they just take their profit. Four bear dojis. It's important that the bodies are shrinking and that the bodies are not particularly big. However, it's bad follow through after a bull breakout. And therefore, this small bull flag might be the final bull flag. Remember I said the bulls were expecting at least a small second leg up. Well, it might be a small leg up, lasting just one, two, three bars. This is a potential final bull flag. And because of that, and because of all the trading range price action, bears will place a limit order to sell at the high of that bar. They'll scale in higher. Their stop is above the top of the most recent major lower high. Remember bulls made money buying that low. Bears made money selling that high. And even the bulls who bought the breakout below this double bottom made money if they use wide stops and scale in. Bulls made money buying below here. Bears made money selling there. A lot of profit for limit order traders. And therefore, bears will sell above this high, betting that we'll get some profit taking and at least enough of a sellout for a one point scalp. And they did. The next bar, the locket fell. Enough for them to get out with a one point scalp. Three consecutive bear bars. One closing on its low with a decent sized body. That is not good for the bulls. Whenever you get a leg up, especially in the training range, and then you start to get a reversal down with three or more consecutive bear bars, the odds are there will be sellers above and the first reversal up will fail and form a lower high. Also, it's a second leg up. One pullback two. And it's a consecutive top pattern. The bears had a double top bear flag here. Instead of getting a swing down, we got a bull breakout. And now we're having a second complex top. A complex top, two legs up. Another complex top, two legs up. So it's a type of low four, even though this low is below that low. The bear is trying to reverse down here. Failed. The bull's got a breakout and a second leg up. And that means a second sell signal. Usually, you're going to get a couple small legs down from that. Because of that, the bears will sell at the high of the prior bar, betting that it'll form a lower high. They'll place a limit order to sell at the high of this bar, and they'll get filled here, and they'll put their stop up there. And they're willing to scale in higher. In this case, they did not have to. The market immediately went down to their profit target, and they exited with a limit order one point below their sell entry. You could call this a bull trend and a high one buy. But the tail on the top of this bar and the three consecutive bear bars made it a low probability bet. Also, you can call this a wedge, one, two, three, or one, two, three, four, and a low four short. Low one, low two. Low one, low two. Maybe we'll get a deeper pullback to the bottom of this buy climax. Maybe even a test of the low of the day. For the bulls, now they have a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down. One, pullback. Two, pullback three. Does not matter that the pullback from the first leg down went to a new high. It's still part of the correction process from this breakout. The bulls have a micro double bottom, a decent buy signal bar. This is a reasonable buy. Also a double bottom, a test of the bottom of the buy climax. Did not quite get there. And that is a problem. It lowers the probability for the bulls looking to buy here. Normally, when you have a buy climax bar and then a correction, and it gets close to the low of the bar, it has to get to the low of that bar. And you can see what happened. We reverse down. I'm not opposed to taking this buy. However, usually when I see an obvious magnet and it's within a point or two of where the low is, the odds are the market has to get down to that magnet. And it makes me hesitant to buy, even though we have a wedge bull flag and it is a reasonable buy. So bulls who did take that buy, they would get out below here. However, they would look to buy reversal up. Some bulls who took that buy would buy more here, betting against a bear trend. We have a failed buy signal, a double top bear flag, early bear trend, double top bear flag. We have a failed high two buy, and it was a reasonable buy. You have to be wondering if we'll get a couple of legs down. Some bears would sell on a stop below this bear bar, betting on a double top bear flag, a low two bear flag, and at least a little bit more down. Also, the bulls who bought above this bull bar thinking they had a wedge bull flag and a small high two, would be disappointed by this bear bar closing on its low. And many of them would get out either below that bear bar or below this bar. Therefore, it's a reasonable short. They get out with a one point scalp. The day is a scalping day. Obviously, you could take some swing trades. A lot of traders would scalp. This is another surprise bar. We have a big tail on the bottom of this bar. So you'd think that we're continuing with the trading range price action. But now we have another bear bar closing on its low. We have three consecutive bear bars. We have a wedge bull flag, and we have three consecutive bear bars breaking below the low of that wedge bull flag. That increases the chances that this breakout will have at least one more small leg down. Therefore, this reversal up probably will fail. There probably will be more sellers than buyers at the high of this bar. We have a larger bear bar. Possible measuring gap. We have a wedge bull flag. A bear breakout, three consecutive bear bars, possibly a measured move down. Some traders will sell that strong bear close, especially since it's the third bar down. Others will sell with a limit order at the high of this bar, or they'll sell this close and sell more one point higher, two points higher, stop above the top of the bear leg. Not that far above, just a little bit above. They're selling this close, some might add on here, it's about one point above the original entry. When you're scaling in, normally you want to make sure your second entry is at least the size of a scalp above your first. The idea is, once you get the reversal up, you're trying to get out break even on your first entry, and you want a scalp profit on your second entry. So you want your second entry to be at least the size of a scalp. So when it gets back to the first entry, you make a profit, a scalp profit on the second. Is this becoming a sell the close bear trend? It might be, it's not particularly strong, but we have three bear bars and a break below, an attempt by the bulls to form a higher low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout, and a higher low, and it's a wedge higher low, so it's a good looking buy signal. But we got three consecutive bear bars, and that is a fairly strong rejection of the buy argument. Some bears will sell closes. Every strong bear close, they'll sell the close, stopped above the most recent, either minor high or more major high. Again, looking for one point scalps. At fellow point, they exit. Other bears will say, huh, that's another bear bar closing on its low. Isn't that another sell the close bar? Yes. So if a bear had a limit order to take a one point profit, they got filled, and then he sees another bear bar closing on its low, he can immediately sell again for another one point scalp. Also there's room to the low of the day. We have a high, a lower high, a lower high. It looks like a trading range, but it could also be a broad bear channel. And if so, we should get down to the low of the day. And there's room from this close down to the low of the day for a scalp. We have a sell the close bear trend, but now we're getting a tail on the bottom of the bar. Also, we've had three bear bars and three more bear bars and a lot of trading range price action. And we're near the low of the day. Whether this is a trading range day, which it is, or a broad bear channel, which it is, we don't know at this point. However, in both cases, the market usually finds buyers around the prior low. This is not a good location to continue to sell closes because we broke to the new low and there may be enough buyers there for the market to bounce. Remember I said bulls were buying below bars and scalping bears were selling above bars and scalping bears selling above even selling above here, adding on scaling in and then getting out buying below here and scalping up. Well, guess what? A new low of the day. Yes, six of the past seven bars have bare bodies, but the bare bodies are not especially big and we have a tail here, bad follow through here, big tail here, new low of the day. Well, a lot of scalpers will buy with a limit order at this low and get filled here. Other traders will look to scalp on a reversal up or maybe if we get a micro double bottom and then a reversal up. Bear trend, bull breakout, lower low major trend reversal, three pushes down, one pullback, two pullback, three pullback. It's a very tight bear channel. The first reversal up probably is minor. However, given that it's a trading range day, a lot of bulls will look to buy. We're around a measure move down. Remember, the bulls had a wedge bull flag here. We got a bear breakout and therefore traders expected two legs down, one pullback, two, and they expected this to be a measuring gap. In other words, there would be profit takers around a measure move down, especially since it's at the low of the day. Many of the bears who did hold and took profits here, they created that tail, are willing to sell again, but probably after only a couple legs up, which means a lot of the bears will not sell the first reversal up and therefore bulls will buy for scalps. You can buy above the high of this bar. You can either put a stop below the low here or use a wider stop. Some bulls will buy here and they'll place a limit order to buy more if it falls below that bar. They'll trade small enough so that if they enter their position, their risk is no bigger than on any other trade. If they buy here and it simply goes up, they'll take their profit. And that's what happened here. Three consecutive bull bars all closing above their midpoints, two closing relatively close to the high. Therefore, if the bears try to get a continuation down, probably buyers at the low of the prior bar and at least a small second leg up. It could be an early buy the close bull trend. Very tight bear channel, probably the first reversal up is minor. However, because of the three bear bars reversing up from the bottom of a trading range, probably we'll get at least two legs up. We don't know if we'll get a fourth, fifth, sixth bar in a row and therefore traders might start buying closes. We do know that if it reverses down, there probably will be buyers below and we'll get a higher low. So bulls buying this close can buy more lower and put a stop down here. Confident that they'll be able to get off break even on their first entry and with a profit on their lower entry. Instead of going down, we went sideways and the bull scalpers were able to exit here with a one point scalp. I gave some more scalping examples in this video and how to manage the trades. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on scalping examples. for example, I can check out our final time. 2 Here we'll see how to build upantageulu. In Miracle, if weliament Bil collected, we will add aientele.