 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on trading broad, bare channels. Channels, when they're broad, usually last at least a few days. So if you're trading on a five-minute chart, that means they'll last at least two or three hundred bars. As with all bear trends, reversals are common, but most will fail. It's always good to diagnose as early as you can so that you can begin trading appropriately for the chart that's in front of you. This is nine days in the E-mini and it's from a broad, bare channel. It's in a bare trend. Starts in the upper left, ends in the lower right, and it has pullbacks that are lasting lots of bars and covering a lot of points. And therefore the channel is broad. If you're trading a five-minute chart, you're not going to be seeing this. You're only going to be looking at one day or maybe two days worth of bars. However, if you do step back and use a bar chart and compress the bars together, and you can look at a lot of bars like this, you can see that in fact the market's in a broad, bare channel. As a day trader, that's not all that important. And if you're going to be looking at this many bars, it's better not to be trading the five-minute chart. It's better to be trading a higher timeframe chart like a 15-minute or a 60-minute chart. It's a bare trend and therefore traders should look to sell. And they certainly should be looking to sell reversals down from rallies. If you do look at a 60-minute chart or a 15-minute chart, let's say you're over here, you'll be able to see that the market is an abroad, bare channel. And therefore, in general, it'll be easier to make money selling because the legs down in general are bigger than the legs up. My general approach is if the market's in a broad, bare channel, look to sell a pullback instead of selling a breakout to a new low. I look to sell a pullback that retraces about half of the prior leg down. So you're looking to sell somewhere in the middle third of the prior leg down. And also, you want to be selling reversals down from breakouts above minor lower highs. When the market's in a broad, bare channel, it's forming major lower highs where there are strong breakouts to new lows. That makes the high before major. And as long as the market continues to make major lower highs, the market's in a bare trend. This is probably a major lower high here or here. Sometimes you get a reversal above the major lower high. And at this point, the market's either in a trading range or in a bull trend. However, if it reverses down quickly enough and strongly enough, the market again becomes always in short and then is either in a trading range or a bear trend. And you can clearly see that even though this rally went above a major lower high here, it simply made a broader channel. It's still a broad, bare channel, even though briefly it looked like it might be reversing. If you are using a higher timeframe chart, like a 15 minute chart or a 60 minute chart, some traders will put up a five minute chart occasionally to find earlier entries. The bars on the five minute chart are smaller and therefore you can enter sooner than on a 60 minute chart where each bar is made up of 12 five minute bars. A broad, bare channel spends a lot of time in a trading range. And when it's in a trading range like this, you don't know if the bear trend will resume or if the bull trend will reverse up from a higher low major trend reversal. When it's in a trading range here for over 200 bars, you trade it like a trading range. You look to buy low, you sell high and you scalp. If you want, since it's still in a broad, bare channel, you can also swing trade. Let's say you sell here. This is the top of a very strong sell off. Therefore, this is a major lower high and traders will place their stop just above the top. If you're willing to take a chance that a trend will last several days, this is where you put your stop. If you're trading a five minute chart, you're probably not going to sell here and put a stop up here. But if you're trading a 15 minute chart or a 60 minute chart, and this looks like a reasonable sell, you might be willing to hold positions overnight, in which case you will use the stop above the top of the most recent major lower high. Alternatively, you can simply look to sell every day. If you think the market's trending down, you can expect rallies to fail. And at the start of every day, you look for a rally and look to sell it. Or look for a pullback. Here we have a gap down and a pullback. Look to sell it. A rally, sell it. A gap up, possibly the start of a bull trend, but it's still below the top of this entire channel. And therefore, it's still possibly part of a bare channel, even though it's above these major lower highs. So traders will sell reversals down, taking a chance that we will not get above these highs or above that high. If you're day trading on a five minute chart, you're going to be exiting at the end of the day, or you'll be exiting on a reversal up from a prior low. This is the same nine day stretch, but it's using a 60 minute chart. You can see the channel down is fairly tight. Pullbacks just lasting a few bars. The bulls tried to get a reversal here, but it failed and somewhere in here, it went always in short again. Through here, it clearly is a tight bare channel. First reversal up. Even though it's big, it's still minor, and that means the odds are it'll test down. Because it's in a bare trend, and the channel is tight, traders should only look to sell. And anytime there's a reversal, they'll look to sell a resumption of the trend back down. They'll assume that the reversals are all minor, and that the channel will remain tight. After each breakout to a new low, if the breakout is reasonably strong, traders will look at the high at the start of that leg down, and consider it a major lower high. And they'll put their stop here. It does not matter if you sold here or here. Once it does this, your stop is here. And the same is true here. If you had a breakout here, and you put your stop here, and you get stopped out, a lot of traders will sell again on a reversal down. A micro double top, taking a chance on bare trend resumption. And at some point down here, you'll conclude this lower high is major, and you'll put your stop up here. Markets sideways here, and a lot of traders will trade it like a trading range. They'll look to buy low and sell high. Since it's still possibly a broad channel down, traders can swing trade the short or scalp the short. If a trader were selling down here, thinking that the market might be in a trading range, he might use a tight stop at the top of the trading range instead of all the way up here or here. If he does that, a lot of traders will look to sell a failed breakout or reversal back down, especially a micro double top. We gapped up here, we traded down. We went up here, we traded down. We went up here again, we traded down. So traders would sell a reversal down. You can call it a double top here and here. So twice the bulls tried to break successfully above this lower high, and they failed twice. We have a double top here with this. Very tight channel again. In fact, very tight channel all the way through here. So traders will sell pullbacks expecting the pullbacks only to last one, two or three bars. For example, they might sell at the limit order at the high of the prior bar, betting that any reversal up will be minor, like this or this. As with all bear trends, reversals are common. And again, as with all bear trends, most reversals fail. That's my 80% rule. If the market's in a bear trend, 80% of reversal attempts will fail. And therefore, it's better to look to sell the reversal attempts than to buy them. Again, nine days of the E-mini, a five minute chart where the bars are all compressed. Trading range here for 90 bars. Trading range here for 250 bars. Whenever there's a trading range, there will be both buy and sell setups. And the bulls will look to buy reversals. Maybe a wedge bottom. And here's a strong breakout. Somewhere in here, the bulls are going to conclude it's always in long. And the odds are the bulls will get at least a small second leg up. And the same is true here. You have a potential final flag, a bear breakout, a higher low major trend reversal, and pretty strong reversal up. So in here, the market's always in long. Probably will get at least a little bit more up. Maybe here. Maybe here. Maybe here. Bad bear channel. Broad bear channel. Often the market is always in long, at least briefly. Traders will look to sell a reversal down. For example, here, there's a double top. It's a slightly higher high double top, but it's a double top. A failed breakout above that major lower high. And the same is true here. A strong reversal up, but potentially a double top, and traders will look to sell a reversal down. They probably will not sell the first. They might sell the second, or third, or fourth. But in any case, they'll be looking to sell a reversal down. Some traders will wait until you start to get a strong breakout, and then sell. With all trends, the market is constantly trying to reverse. But most reversals are minor, and therefore fail. They become either bear flags or trading ranges. Sometimes strong enough to become always in long. And that's one of the differences between a broad channel like this and a tight channel like this. A tight channel like this, the pullbacks do not last long enough for the market to become, always in long. Bears expect all reversal attempts to fail, and they're looking to sell reversals down. A breakup of a prior high, they'll sell the reversal down. Or they'll sell at the prior high and use a wide stop above an even higher high. All trends have inertia. A broad bear channel is not as strong as a tight bear channel, and certainly not as strong as a breakout. But most reversal attempts will fail. Most bottom attempts will therefore fail. Markets and a bear trend, so it's constantly forming bottoms. But every reversal leads to either a bear flag and a resumption of the bear trend, or a trading range, which will probably lead to a resumption of the bear trend. The bulls see a wedge bottom. They see a double bottom. Higher low major trend reversal. Another higher low major trend reversal. Lower low major trend reversal. Expanding triangle bottom. Lots of little wedges and triangles. The bulls constantly are seeing reversals, but most reversal attempts fail. For example, this is a higher low major trend reversal. You can call it a double bottom. But when the channel is this tight, the first reversal up probably is minor and not going to go very far. The bears look for the reversals to fail and they'll sell on a resumption of the bear trend down. They'll look for the reversal to fail and start to turn down and they'll sell again. Or they'll simply hold their short position and use a wide stop. The market's starting to reverse down, reverse down, reverse down. Bears will sell, betting on a resumption of the broad bear channel, which means they're betting that we'll get a new low. They're selling up here in a broad bear channel. They're betting that we'll get at least a new low. All broad channels spend a lot of time in trading ranges. So at this point, the market is in a bear trend, a broad bear channel, but it's also in a trading range. And it's possibly in an early bull trend, a higher low major trend reversal and good reversal up. That's common for the market to be simultaneously in a trading range and an early bull trend and a continuation of the bear trend. As soon as you break above any kind of a major lower high, this is not all that major. This is more major. But in any case, as soon as the market breaks above a major lower high like here or here, the market is no longer in a bear trend. At that moment, it's in either a bull trend or a trading range. However, if it reverses down strongly, it's then back to being in a bear trend or a trading range and the bull trend is over. Whenever the market is in a bear trend, it's regularly having strong reversals up that break above the top of the channel, which is the bear trend line. And then it reverses down again and you can draw a new trend line and the channel will get flatter and broader as time goes on. Mark is starting to reverse down. So you have two points. You can draw a new line, but this line is flatter than that line and the channel is becoming broader. So it's pretty tight here, but now it's a broader channel. The market rallied here, reverse down. You can draw a new line. Watch how the market behaves. Broke above the line here, reverse down. You can draw a new line and you can repeat the process. Every time there's a trend line break, you draw a new trend line and the lines become flatter. The trend becomes weaker and usually broader. Eventually it transitions into a trading range. Every broad channel contains trading ranges and some of them last a lot of bars. On the five minute chart, this one is lasting maybe 300 bars. When the market's in a trading range, it often goes above highs and then reverses down and it goes below lows and then reverses up. Sometimes it even goes above relatively major highs. But as long as it reverses down, traders will continue to sell, betting that the bear trend will resume and be a flatter, broader bear trend. Strong reversal up, strong reversal up. If you're day trading, the five minute chart, the market's always in long for these several hours and it's reasonable to be long. If you're day trading, you're only looking at this day and you have a higher low major trend reversal and a strong reversal up. So you're going to be buying for a swing through here. Whenever the market's in a trading range or in a broad channel, second leg traps are common where the market rallies and has a second leg up and it looks like it's breaking out into a bull trend. But the second leg fails and the bear trend resumes. All bear trends need a series of lower highs. And breakouts above relatively minor lower highs are common. For example, this is a minor lower high. The top of the bear leg is here or here. Going above this is not enough to end the bear trend. Going above this, this is a fairly major lower high. So a lot of traders will conclude the bear trend has ended at this point and that it now has evolved into a trading range and possibly a bull trend. This is a breakout above a minor lower high, minor lower high right here. But the truly major lower highs, the most important ones, should continue to hold and the rally should fail and reverse down below the biggest major lower highs. As with any trade, you should always try to diagnose what the market is doing as early as you possibly can so that you're trading in an appropriate way for what the market is doing. The bears have a fairly tight channel here. So it's a breakout and pretty good follow through bars. The market's always in short. In here, it's a tight bear channel. However, the market becomes probably always in long here or here. And again, same thing here. We're selling off. We have a lower low major trend reversal. Pretty good reversal up. The market's probably always in long somewhere here. Yet, the highs are still above the most major prior lower highs. And therefore, the bear still have a broad bear channel if you look at the past several days. If you're just looking at today, the bulls have a reversal that became a trading range day. Traders will sell reversals down because they see this entire rally as being above a pretty major lower high. And they'll bet that the market is either in a trading range or in a broad bear channel. We have a reversal down here, a reversal down here. So you can draw a line across these two highs. And then see what the market does when it gets to that pink line. Here it went a little bit above and reversed down. The bulls were hoping for a higher low and a bull trend. But here the bulls gave up and the bears took control again. So the market is back to always in short, even though it was always in long through here. Broad bear channels always spend a lot of time in trading ranges. And within a trading range, there are always reasonable buy setups and reasonable sell setups. And the market is always in a bull trend and a bear trend. For example, a higher low major trend reversal in a trading range. What would happen if the market kept going up like this? You would say the bull trend began here. And therefore, this is a bull trend. Even through here, it's a bull trend. But it's also still forming lower highs in a broad bear channel. When the market is down here, where did the bear trend begin? It began up here. So this is part of a bear trend as well. And it's clearly part of a trading range. Bear trends need lower lows and lower highs. But a lot of times in a bear channel, you don't get a lower low until the market breaks below the trading range. Which means it can go sideways without a lower low for 100, 200 bars. In general, you need to see three pushes down before you can conclude that the market's in a broad bear channel. And a lot of times, when you get three pushes down, the market's in a wedge and it's about to reverse up. Broad bear channels spend a lot of time going sideways. And sideways means confusion, a trading range. A lot of times, it's not clear if the bulls are going to win or if the bears are going to win. And what traders do is they trade what is clear, which means they trade pieces of the legs up and down. Reasonably strong reversal down, totally reversing that reversal up. A lot of bars closing near their lows. The market's always in short. Traders will sell. Stop up here, looking for at least a small second leg down. If you want higher probability, you wait until the bears start to get consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows. And you could sell here. Tight bear channel. First reversal up, probably minor, which means the trading range. The bulls see two legs down with a lot of overlap among the bars. A lot of bars with prominent tails. And they're thinking that this might be a trading range. And therefore, the reversals up might be big enough to buy. So two legs down, one pullback two. Trading ranges often have two-legged patterns. One pullback two, one pullback two. And traders like to buy reversals up from two legs down and sell reversals down from two legs up. If a trader did not want to take this buy because the channel is so tight, he might wait for a major trend reversal. And that's what we have here. You can call it a little wedge here or a bigger wedge, bear bar, and then second push, third push. So a wedge, high or low, major trend reversal. Certainly an okay buy for a swing up. All major reversals are relatively low probability. 40% chance of becoming a trend. But as long as you're holding for a reward that is at least twice your actual risk, the math makes sense in taking these buys. Some traders want higher probability and they'll wait to buy the third or fourth consecutive bull close, use a wide stop, and scale in if the market pulls back. However, with a channel as tight as this, this reversal up is probably minor. Yes, you got a lot of bull bars closing above their mid points. The odds are we'll get at least a small second leg up. But if I see this and I'm not long, I'd rather buy a pullback. When you're looking at broad channels, broad bear channels, they typically last at least several days. They're bear trends and therefore reversals are common. And like all bear trends, most reversals fail. And therefore, it's better to look to sell a rally from a reversal than to buy the rally betting on a successful reversal into a bull trend. As always, you should try to diagnose what's going on as soon as possible so that you can start trading appropriately. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on trading broad bear channels. I'll see you guys in theK aslında TV or Friday. Because this is going to keep your eye on collision.