 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on trends. I'm going to begin by talking about what exactly I mean when I use the term trend. Next I'll move on to the most important feature of bull trends and that's that it needs higher lows. And finally, bear trends need lower highs. In a trend, prices move mostly in one direction. So here, lower left, upper right, even though the market went sideways for a couple of times. Also, trends are contained within channels. All trends are contained within channels. Some channels are very steep, but the channels are there. There's a trend line below and a trend channel line above. The trend channel line can be simply a parallel of this line or you can draw the line connecting tops. Now, I said every trend is contained in a channel. The channel might not be all that obvious, but it's there and it's important to learn how to recognize it. This is a bull trend bar. Bull trend bar. A trend can be as small as a single bar and it could be as large as the entire chart. Here we had a trend lasting two bars going up and then many bars going down. When I use the word trend, I'm talking about a major trend, even though I don't always say major. And there are at most one or two of them on the chart at any one time. If you see three or four trends on the chart, those trends are minor and I usually don't use the term trend to describe them. I usually refer to them as swings or legs. Here we have a bull trend. Is this a bear trend? I would call it more of a bear swing. It's about a 50% pullback of this bull trend. Plus it's much less strong than the bull trend. And is this a bull trend? Again, I would call it a swing. It's less than half of the bars on the chart and it's not particularly strong. So to me, this is a bull trend followed by a bear swing and a bull swing. I said that a bull trend has higher highs and higher lows and it's contained within a rising channel. The bottom line is the trend line, the bull trend line, and the top line is the trend channel line. Trend line, channel line. Some people refer to both as trend lines. So some people will say this is the bottom trend line. That's the top trend line of the channel. I usually refer to the upper line as the trend channel line. In general, traders like to put their stops below the bottom of the most recent major higher low. Here we have a major low. We don't know if it's a higher low, but it's certainly the start of this bull trend. And traders like to put their stops just below there if they're buying. Is this a major higher low right here? No. I talked about this in earlier videos. A major higher low is one that has a very strong bull breakout and usually results in a new high. And this did not get to a new high and it's not a very strong bull breakout. So it's a minor higher low right here. And that is not a good location for a stop. You still keep the stop down here. Whether you're swinging or scalping, your stop is down here. Again, don't put your stop below minor higher lows because too often you'll get stopped out and the market will then resume up after going below your stop. Stop below here, here, here. All are bad stops. The correct stop is down here. Again, it doesn't matter if you're swing trading or scalping. This is where your stop goes below the bottom of the last strong leg up. So if you put your stop below this bar or below that bar or below this bar, you would have been stopped out. Yet the trend would have continued. This is not enough to change the premise that the market is in a bull trend. It's a pullback. You can call it a trading range, but it's still in a bull trend. I'll raise my stop if the market reaches a new high or if there's a strong bull breakout. One bar usually is not enough, but here we've got a couple decent bull bars and a new high. And this low followed these lows. It went to a lower low. Most bulls would conclude that if we go to a new high and drop below this low, we're no longer in a bull trend. We're not necessarily in a bear trend, but the bull trend has ended. Traders would then view the chart as being either in a trading range or possibly in a bear trend. This is a good location for a stop after you have this bull breakout. A lot of traders might still keep their stop down here, but most would not. After you get a new high with a couple of decent bull bars and you're getting a failed breakout below the trading range, that combination of factors is enough to make this a major higher low. And the bulls should not allow the market to fall below it if their premise of a bull trend is still valid. I said that if the market falls below a prior higher low, it may be converting into a trading range or a bear trend. But if it falls below a minor higher low like this, all it's doing is converting into a flatter bull channel, a broader flatter bull channel. We have a very tight bull channel here, but at this point we start going up. The channel now is broader and flatter. This is what I mean. I mentioned that bull trends need higher lows. They're even more important than higher highs because the higher lows determine where traders put their stops. So if the market falls below a prior higher low, below here, below here, it can still be a bull trend, but it might be a broader further. Flatter weaker bull trend closer to converting into a trading range. And it's possible that it could even be converting into a bear trend. Typically though, when you have a trend that strongly up, it's not going to go directly into a bear trend. It usually first has to convert into a trading range. So we've got a strong bull breakout to a new high. So this then becomes a major higher low. Once you see this bulls raise their stop from here to there. So they trail their stop. They tighten their stop. This is not going to convert into a trend in the opposite direction by falling straight down. Probably the best the bears get is a trading range. And they usually typically need at least a small double top. If you're a bull trend trader and you see this, we have a double top. You can call it a wedge. One, two, three. Decent bear bar. Bad follow through, but no bull bar. Some more bear bars. So now you have six bars down, five bear bars, and you fell below a major higher low. Probably the bull trend is over and probably the market is either in a trading range or a bear trend. It's about a 50% pullback from this rally. So the bulls will stop themselves out as the market falls below that low. However, it's still probably at least a trading range. The bears probably will need a major trend reversal if they're going to convert it into a bear trend. And that's what they got. They got a wedge lower high. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Wedge lower high. Decent sell signal bar. And they converted it into a bear trend. It still could be a large high two buy. Leg one, pull back two. It's holding above this low. But I think most bulls get out below that low or above this bull bar. And bears would short somewhere in here. Or they would short this wedge lower high for a swing down. Bull trend. In this case, it's a fairly broad bull channel. We have higher highs all the way up. We have higher lows all the way up. And after each strong breakout to a new high, bulls will raise their stop to below the most recent higher low. And you can see, after each strong breakout to a new high, when there's a pullback, it did not fall below the most recent higher low. This did not fall below that. And then a strong breakout to a new high, major higher low. Market tried to reverse down. Terrible follow through. It became a bear trap. And the bull trend resumed. So each reversal attempt held above the most recent prior higher low. That's one of the hallmarks of a bull trend. In a broad bull channel like this, you often have pretty strong sell offs. We have many of them here. And sometimes the sell offs are even strong enough to convert the market into always in short. In other words, an early bear trend. However, unless the bears are able to get below major higher lows, even if it becomes briefly always in short, the odds are the bull trend will continue. I would say that this market was not short. I think even though we had pullbacks here, 10 bars, 15 bars, I think it stayed always in long. Because the bears failed to get consecutive big bear trend bars. They have two bear bars here, but a tail and followed by a bull bar. So to me, this is not enough to convert the market to always in short. Sometimes when you have a broad bull channel, the market will sometimes become always in short. Yet the market can still be in the broad bull channel. I'm always drawing lines on charts. You start with what you have in front of you. As more bars get added to the right, you have to adjust your lines. The lines are rarely ever perfect. At this point, I'm using these lines, but then the market falls below here. Then I use this point for my line, but it's still a bull trend. It's just flatter. It's not as vertical. And it's also broader at that point. So you can see here, we fell below the blue line. So now we have a new low market rally. This is now my trend. And we fell below that line. So when it starts up, I'll replace this line with one down here. And when you get to the bottom of channels, bulls like to buy reversals up. So they buy above this bar and they buy above this bar and they buy above that bar or this bar. I said that we had reversal attempts repeatedly in this broad bull channel. None of them was strong enough to convert the trend to always in short. And the bulls expect all of these reversal attempts to fail. So when they see a bear reversal attempt, what are they doing? They're buying. Anytime there's a broad bull channel and it pulls back somewhere into the middle of the last leg up, bulls buy. Okay, we have a rally pull back somewhere in the middle third, bulls buy. A rally pulls back to the middle third of that last rally, a buy. Rally pull back somewhere into the middle of that rally, bulls start looking to buy. And then they tend to take partial profits at new highs. And that's what in part creates the pullbacks. And bears see something really important. So let's say you're a bear and you see this right here. Okay. A new high and a pullback that fell below this high. Well, what are you going to do if you're a bear? Well, you'll see this high. You're going to place a limit order to sell at that high, betting that we'll drop back down below this high. Because that's what we did before. And trends tend to weaken as time goes on. So bulls are buying pullbacks to the middle third of the last leg up. So they buy somewhere in here. And bears are starting to sell new highs. And bulls sell at new highs as well to take profits. And bulls like to see these reversal attempts. As long as the market's continuing to make higher lows, they assume the trend will continue. So whenever they see a reversal attempt like this or that or this, guess what? They buy it because they expect the reversal attempt will fail. So the bulls will buy bear closes and they'll use the appropriate stop. A bull buying this close, his stop is below the most recent major higher low. And he bet that the bear reversal would fail and that the trend up would continue. Same with here. You could buy that close. You could buy below that bull bar because it's a bad looking sell. You can buy that bear close. Another attempt to reverse, you buy that close. I wouldn't draw this as a trend line here, here and extend it across. However, either one of these you can use for the first point of a line. And then here's an obvious second point we reverse down. And to find the bottom of the channel, you could either simply use lows like draw a line from here to here, or you can use a parallel line. At this point, we know the market was turning down here. Maybe it'll fall to the bottom of a channel that is created from a parallel to that line. Once we start to turn down here, a lot of traders can see an obvious top of a channel. And they'll create a parallel of it and drag it down to a bar that contains all of the bars. Would I drag it to this bar? No, because these bars would then be below the channel. I want to drag it down to the bar that would result in the channel containing all of the bars. And then traders will look to buy a reversal up. Channels are rarely perfect. There's usually some problem with every channel, but it gives you an idea of what the market's trying to do. And if the market's near the bottom of a channel, traders look to buy for a reversal up. And if it gets near the top of a channel, they look to sell for a pullback. Just like a bull trend needs higher lows, a bear trend needs lower highs. Bear trend has lower highs and lower lows. And it's contained in a falling channel right here. So here we have a spike down, a pullback, and then a bear channel. Now, this is a major lower high. We have a reasonably strong breakout to a new low. A lot of bears will put their stops above that high. And I cannot tell if this went above that. It looks like it might have. And if a bear did exit on a stop above that bar, he would look to sell again on a reversal down because of a possible double top bear flag. So double top bear flag, neckline, looking for a measured move down. The top of the channel is the bear trend line. And the bottom is the channel line. So bear trend channel line. In a bear trend, bears want to put their stops above the top of some major sell-off. Here we have a very strong bear breakout. So bears selling anywhere this close at the market above this bar, below that bar, doesn't matter. Their stop is still above this high. So it's above the most recent major high. Let's say we're at this point. Is this a major high? Will bears lower their stops from here to here? I don't think so. That's not a particularly strong bear breakout and did not get down to a new low. The bears who shorted for any reason still have their stop up here because they know since this is not a major low, the market could easily go above it and still be in a bear trend. So we can get a low two or a wedge bear flag. So we can get one more slightly higher high, another slightly higher high, and still be in a bear trend. If you're selling for any reason, your stop is above the top of this major sell-off. This is a bad location for a stop. Like I said, you could easily get a two-legged pullback. One, pullback, and then two, going above that minor lower high, and then the bear trend could resume down from the low two bear flag. And that's what happened. One, pullback, two. We have a two-legged bear flag, a low two short, a double top bear flag, decent sell signal bar. A bear who sold down here, anywhere in here, and then put a stop just above that lower high, lost money in a bear trend. And if the bear made that mistake, he should get short again as the bear trend resumes down. So he would sell again below that bear bar. Now, here we have a low two bear flag, a failed breakout, a failed reversal attempt. And then we broke out fairly strongly to a new low. At this close, a lot of the bears will tighten their stops. They'll say, oh, this is pretty major. We got our new low, and we have a pretty decent bear bar. And that's after trying to reverse up. So the market should not get above this bar. If it gets above this bar, then the premise of a bear trend is probably no longer valid. The market would then either be in a trading range or in a bull trend. And if you're trading it like a bear trend, and it has become a trading range or a bull trend, you want to get up. Because your premise of a bear trend is no longer valid. So after a strong breakout, this becomes a major lower high. And bears will take their stop from here and put it to just above there. Pretty tight channel. And if the market trades above a lower high, as it did here, it's probably not going to be a bull trend, but it could be a weaker bear trend. It could be a trading range, but more likely it's going to be a weaker bear trend, broader, flatter. So initially we had this as the bear trend, very tight. And then once we have this lower high, we can draw a line here, still pretty tight. And now we have a new high above both of those possible bear channels. So now we have a new channel from this high to that high. And it's broader and flatter than the other channels. Here we've got a bear micro channel. So it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. And we have a series of lower highs and lower lows. Is this a major lower high? Probably is. Had a pretty strong bear breakout and follow through. And it made a new low. And then also we're trying to get a bear breakout below a bear channel. So if you connect these lows, that would create a bear channel. And here we're trying to break below it. That's not a good thing. 75% of bear channel breakouts where the market breaks below the bottom of a bear channel. 75% of them will reverse up to the top of the channel or to the top of the most recent sell climax. This bar, maybe that bar. But in any case, if you're short and you are going to exit on a stop, your stop now is above this bar or above that bar. Both of those are reasonable. And what happens if you get stopped out? Is it a bull trend? No. A tight bear channel like this usually cannot then become a bull trend. Usually the best the bulls can get is a trading range. And if the bears are unable to resume the trend down, the bulls have a shot at a major trend reversal within that trading range. And at that point, the probability of the bulls taking control is better. Usually the first breakout of a channel results in a minor reversal and a trading range or a bear flag rather than a bull trend. The bears get stopped out here in a strong bull bar and a pretty good reversal strongly down, strongly up. Probably a minor reversal. Some bears will sell below this bar on the failed breakout above these bars. Others will wait to see if we get a series of bear bars, three or four bear bars, and then sell them below this bar. Or if we get a micro double top. Strong enough bull bar, probably at least a minor second leg up, likely. And in this particular case, we got a particularly strong leg up. It went above all of the highs in the channel, did not get above the top of the bull trend. So what do you do? Well, a lot of traders would sell below that bar. Two legs up, one, two, or a wedge, one or one. And then two, three, or one, two, three. Different ways to draw it. We'll look at this as a possible second leg trap in a developing trading range. First leg up, pull back, second leg up. Terrible follow through and pretty bad follow through. And we did not get above this high. So this is probably a bull leg in a trading range. A lot of bears will sell that. And the bulls probably would get out because disappointing follow through despite a strong bull breakout. All trends are constantly trying to reverse. So here we have a bear trend. Lower highs, lower lows, constantly trying to reverse. And sometimes the reversal up is strong enough to make the market always in long. Here we have a bull breakout above this lower high. And then a follow through bar. Tail on top, not especially big, but probably always in long. Pretty common when you're in a broad bear channel for the market to become always in long. However, usually the bear trend resumes before the market gets above a major lower high like this or like that. Even though the market rallied up strongly, especially here, many attempts to reverse up. Every rally resulted in a lower high. So it's still a bear channel. And traders will look to sell the reversal down. Now, you have a bear bar and a follow through bar, bear bar. Do you put the stop above this high or above that high? No, this is a minor lower high. Did not have a strong bear breakout. Did not get to a new low. And therefore, putting a stop just above the high of that bar is a low probability bet. You're throwing money away. You still have to rely on your swing stop. Now, what about this? Is this a good enough major lower high so bears can put their stops above it? Maybe. This is not a strong bear breakout, but it is a new low. A lot of bears will not put their stop above here. They'll keep the stop up here. If the bears do put their stop just above this bar and they get stopped out here, they'll look to sell a reversal down either below either of these bars or below here. Betting that the rally does not look strong. It looks more like either a bull leg in a trading range or a bull leg that becomes a bear flag. Bears, they see these strong rallies and they say, yeah, it's a strong rally. Maybe it's even always in long, but it did not get above the top of this major lower high. And therefore, it's probably going to fail and become a bear flag. So bears will look to sell the same with here. You say, oh, we rallied for 15 bars. That's pretty bullish. It is. But it lacked consecutive big bull trend bars closing in their highs. And it did not get above the most recent major lower high. So bears will be selling here. Again, channels are rarely perfect. You can see the way I drew it. I connected this high and that high and ignored this bar going slightly above. And we're trying to go slightly above again. Traders don't really care if it hits the channel exactly and turns down. They care that it turns down somewhere around the channel. So bears are looking to sell on a reversal down from the channel, the top of the channel, somewhere around the channel. A lot of traders prefer to sell below bear bars. So some traders would sell below this bear bar. Others would take the short below this doji bar. And the same over here. You could sell below that bull bar or below the bear bars. And here you could sell below the doji. You could sell below the bear bar. In this video, I talked about how I use the term trend. I also talked about the importance of bull trends needing higher lows and the importance of bear trends needing lower highs. As long as the bear trend is forming lower highs, traders believe the premise of a bear trend is still valid. If the market gets above a lower high in a bear trend, the bear trend probably has ended and has evolved either into a trading range or less likely a bull trend. And the opposite is true of a bull trend forming higher lows. If the market falls below a major higher low, the bull trend probably has ended and has probably converted into a trading range. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of five videos on trends. so we can put about 50% on trends. And have you stayed there? Can long as you leave the Euh Bharatot below or change your syllable by eyes when capture some pixels when you collect sunpir bisous. Thank you.