 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of six videos on trading the open. I want to talk about two particular breakout mode patterns that are fairly common. First, I'm going to be talking about a pattern that I call breakout mode. With that, what I mean is after the first bar, there's a new high that reverses down and a new low below the first bar that reverses up. Either one can come first. Traders then look for a breakout either above the high or the low, and they expect the breakout to last for about a measured move. Next, I want to talk about the breakout of the first 18 bars of the day. At the end of 18 bars, there is a 90% chance that the day has seen either the high or low of the day, and a lot of traders will enter a breakout of the first 18 bars of the day. We have a rally here on the open and then a trading range. And anytime you have a trading range, the market's in breakout mode. Here's a sell off and then a trading range. However, I'm not talking about this kind of a pattern today. I'm talking about a breakout pattern that begins immediately on the open, not after an initial rally or an initial sell off. You can look at the videos on trading breakouts to see how to trade trading ranges in this kind of a circumstance. There are two patterns here that I want to discuss. This first one I call breakout mode, the one on the left. After the first 10 bars, I want to see a move above the high of the first bar and then a reversal down, a move below the low of the first bar and then a reversal up. Either can come first. Traders then look to buy on a stop above the high or sell on a stop below the low. If they take the sell, they put their protective stop above the high. If they take the buy, their initial protective stop is below the low. If the pattern occurs with fewer than 10 bars, it's less reliable. And if the opening range is more than half of the size of an average day's range, the breakout is probably not going to lead to a measured move. It'll probably simply be a trading range day. So you want the initial range to be about half the size of an average recent day or less. Today, the bulls got a bull breakout above the reversal down and therefore the odds were that this would remain the low of the day. And that means that the day would either be a bull trend day or a trading range day. The initial goal for the bulls is about a measured move up. And sometimes it can be much more, sometimes less. But that's a reasonable initial goal. Remember, you're buying the breakout because this initial range is about half or less the size of an average day's range. And you'd expect the range to get up to an average day's range. And therefore, a measured move up. This black bar, the bear bar here, is the 18th bar of the day. This is the low of the first 18 bars. And this is the high of the first 18 bars, this bull bar before the bear bar. Some traders will also look to enter on a breakout of the 18 bar range. Therefore, this particular breakout mode pattern after its breakout also became a breakout of the 18 bar range, which is the second pattern I'm going to talk about today. I look for the 18th bar of the day. Here it's a little bull doji. At the close of that 18th bar, there's a 90% chance that the market has either seen the high for the day or the low for the day. And therefore, traders look to trade a breakout of the range. If the 18th bar has a breakout a few bars later that immediately reverses, then you have to be thinking that the market may break below the opposite side of the range. And then this would remain the high of the day. Here you have a breakout of the 18 bar range and a second failed breakout of this initial range. A reasonable sell looking for a swing down. Alternatively, traders can sell with a stop on the break below the range. Small range, reversal down from around an hour and a half into the day. Traders will look to sell a breakout below the range and expect about a measured move down. Here, the market fell for more than that. Once the bears got their breakout, they knew there was a 90% chance this would remain the high of the day. And that means that the day would either continue as a trading range day or become a bear trend day. Now, what about breaking above the 18 bar range here? Does that mean this had a 90% chance of being the low of the day? Well, at that instant, when the market here went above the 18 bar range, it did have a 90% chance of remaining the low of the day this bar. But when it immediately reversed, that 90% quickly became more like 50-50. And then once the bears got the bear breakout, this had a 90% chance of remaining the high of the day. Is this a breakout mode pattern after the first bar we reversed up and we reversed down? No. So this is not one of these patterns because the reversal up did not come from below the low of the first bar. The reversal up here came from below the low. The reversal down came from above the high of the first bar. So technically this is not the same as this, whereas this is both a breakout mode pattern and a breakout of an 18 bar range pattern. I'm going to be talking about these two common types of breakouts on the open today. We have an opening range, a bear breakout, and about a measured move down. Here we have an opening range and a bull breakout and about a measured move up. I said that traders want to see the reversal down come from above the high of the first bar. Well, for me, if the trading range begins on the fourth bar, the first, second, third, or fourth bar, then I look for a breakout of that trading range. And therefore, while this is not a classic textbook breakout mode pattern that I just described a moment ago, the trading range began on the fourth bar. So I would still treat it like a breakout mode bar. After a reversal down and a reversal up, traders will look to sell a breakout below or a breakout above. Some traders sold below this bar, others sold below this bar. This is the 18th bar of the day, this little bear doji bar. At this point, traders are looking to sell either a breakout below the low of the day or buy a breakout above the high of the day, looking for a measured move. This is also a breakout mode pattern as well. After the first bar, we had a new low that reversed up and a new high that reversed down. Not enough bars, not 10 bars. At this point, we have a double top and a reversal down. At this point, there is 10 bars. Therefore, we have what we need. We have a reversal up from below the low of the first bar. I reversed down from above the high of the first bar. The range of the opening range is about half the size of an average recent range. And we have at least 10 bars in the pattern. This is a good breakout mode pattern. This is an atypical pattern. Traders can either sell below this bar or below that bar. And as I said, the trading range began on the fourth bar instead of the first bar. This is much less common than this type of a pattern. After the first bar, the market made a new high, reversed down. Made a new low, reversed up. The reversal here came after about 10 bars. This is a classic textbook type of breakout mode pattern. Breakout of the opening range. Closed above the high. Some traders will buy on a stop. One tick above that high. Or they'll buy the close. Or they'll buy the close of the follow through bar. And put a protective stop down here. Their initial goal is about a measured move up. Which they got. A lot of traders will front run the pattern. By front run the pattern. I mean they expect the breakout to occur. And they don't wait for the breakout. They enter early. For example, after you've had the reversal down. Traders are going to look for a reversal up. Especially below yesterday's low. And this is a micro double bottom. This doji bar, it went down and up. We went down on the bear bar. And now we're going up again. Some traders will buy on a stop above here. Expecting a breakout of the opening range. And rally for a bottom measured move up. Other traders would wait for this. We have the strong reversal up. And now we have a triangle. It's an Iii. This bar is inside this bar. Inside that bar. And this bar is inside that bar. And you have a bull bar closing on its high. Some traders will buy on a stop above this bull bar. Knowing that if it gets above that bar. The odds are 60 or 70% that it will go above the high of the day. And trigger the breakout mode entry. Breakout mode. We have an early trading range. The market went below the first bar. Reversed up. Went above the first bar. Reversed down. The range is about half or less the size of a recent range. There are only. What is this? About seven bars in the range. That reduces the probability that breaking below the range. Or breaking above the range will lead to a measured move. The market usually has to go sideways more. Once you've had the two reversals. Here we have the reversal down. There's a 50% chance you'll get a successful breakout above the high. 50% chance you'll get a successful breakout below the low. And that's why I call it breakout mode. Because that's what breakout mode means. Equal probability of a breakout up or down. Traders can sell below the low. Even though the pattern is small. They might wait for a second reversal up. After the market has had about 10 bars. And then sell below this low. You can see a lot of traders sold. As it was going down below that low. Strong sell off. Breakout to a new low. Some traders will look to sell about a 50% pullback. Or on a reversal down from resistance. 50% pullback is resistance. And then testing this high. We have a reversal up here. And then the market sold off. Some bears will sell reversal down from there. Especially since this is a micro double top. We went down, up, and then down again with a good sell signal bar here. Therefore, there's a double top. And the second top has a micro double top. And about a 50% pullback from the breakout below the breakout mode pattern. Reasonable to take that sell. Sometimes, when you get a breakout like this. And you get a reversal up. The market can become always in long. And it probably was here. We had four consecutive bull bars. Eight bars or so without a bare body. It probably was always in long. However, traders expect a resumption of the bear trend. And they are looking to sell. Bear breakout. Especially once we've had this bear breakout. 90% chance this will remain the high of the day. And that means that the day will either be a trading range day. Or a bear trend day. 90% certain. When the range is small like this. In terms of the number of bars here. It's only seven bars. We've had a reversal down and a reversal up. And seven or eight bars. A lot of times traders think that the range has to grow. They're not eager to sell below the low. Especially since this is a double bottom bull flag. We have a gap up and a rally. And a pullback to the moving average. Slightly lower low, but it's a double bottom bull flag. This is a reasonable buy setup. Looking for a swing up. And it began as a good swing up. We started the sell off. So we have a reversal down. Two reversals down from above. And yesterday's high. Here and again here. That is reason enough to take the sell. But anyway, after the first bar. New high reverses down. And then after about 10 bars. We have a reversal up. This is a more reliable. Breakout mode pattern. Also the range is still about half of an average recent range. You can see yesterday. You cannot see the bars to the left. But this is about half of the average recent range. And therefore it's a good stop entry sell. Looking for a swing down. You can either sell on a stop below the range. You can wait for the breakout bar. And sell the close if it looks good. You can sell the close of the follow through bar. Or you can wait for a pull back. Maybe to the moving average. And then sell a breakout below the bear flag. After the first bar we went to a new low. This low is below the low of the first bar. We went to a new high above the first bar. We reversed up. We reversed down. But the pattern is only four bars. A lot of traders will not consider that a good enough breakout mode pattern. And therefore they're not going to buy on a stop above the high. And they're not going to sell on a stop below the low. Unless the pattern first gets bigger. And it did here. New low reversed up. New high reversed down. But too small. And now it reversed down here. And it's more like ten bars. I think it's nine bars. But that's still a higher probability sell below here. And a higher probability buy above here. After we get that reversal down. Would I buy up here on a stop? I would not. It's a tight trading range. And it's a continuation of yesterday's tight trading range. You're buying near the top of the tight trading range. And the close of the breakout bar could not even close above the high of the range. This is more of a limit order market. Traders are more likely to bet against the breakout. In other words sell at that high. And sell more lower. Than buying at the high. Betting on a measured move up. Now we've had ten bars. Close to ten bars. Traders are more willing to sell on the stop. But it's still selling at the bottom of a tight trading range. And a lot of traders would rather sell a pullback instead of the breakout. For example, micro double top here. They might sell below that bear bar. They might sell with a limit order at the moving average. They might sell above this bear bar arguing it's a bad bull flag after this reversal up. We have a bear breakout. Close below the low of the opening range. Good for the bears. And the follow through bar had a bear body. And that is the minimum follow through that the bears need to believe the market is going lower. And therefore some bears will sell the close of the follow through bar. Looking for about a measured move down based upon the height of the opening range. And you can see the day's low is just about exactly a measured move down. After the first bar we got our new low and reversed up. We have a new high and reversed down. Too small. The pattern is only three bars. Traders will wait for another reversal. And therefore they'll only look at this as a reversal down. And they will ignore the reversal up. Reversal down. Reversal up. So now breakout mode. And the bulls got the breakout. But as I said several times. That does not mean bull trend. It means either bull trend or trading range. The chance of a bear trend is small at that point. Therefore bulls either buy the breakout or they buy pullbacks. Here we have a triangle. Reversal up. Reversal up. Reversal up. Here we have about a 50% pullback from the initial rally. They'll buy the reversal up. Betting that either the day will be a bull trend or a trading range. This day remained mostly a trading range. New low after the first bar. Reversed up. New high. Reverse down. And we have about 10 bars. And the breakout is coming after about 10 bars. Reasonable to buy the high. The range is about half of an average day's range. Before the breakout. The bears see a new low reversing up. A new high reversing down. Some bears will sell this. It's reasonable. You have a double top below the moving average. So a double top bear flag. Possible high today. However, most of those bears will get out above this bull bar. We have a reversal up. Second failed breakout below yesterday's low. Reversed up. Reversed up again. So that's good for the bulls. And the bears taking this short need the market to go down. They know the bulls will buy a reversal up. And the bulls did get another reversal up here. This is a reasonable swing buy. The bears are sold here. Most of them would get out here. And that's why this bar looks like this. The bears bought back their shorts. And the bulls bought a higher low reversal. So it's a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. After a second reversal up from below yesterday's low. Breakout mode traders will simply buy on a stop above the high of the opening range. Looking for a measured move up. And they got about a measured move up a little bit more. This is fairly common for swing traders to take multiple entries. Some bulls would have bought above this bear bar or above this bull bar for a second failed breakout below yesterday's low. The bears would then sell here. Bulls will buy here. A lot of times on the open when you're looking for a swing, you end up taking one or two entries in both directions before you ultimately get the swing. And you get some small losers, some small winners on the initial entries. And then you finally get a swing. After the first bar, we got our new low reversed up. New high reversed down. That's the minimum needed for the market to get an early trading range. In general, you want the trading range to be reasonably long. 10 bars is the reasonable guide. Sometimes it's only four or five bars. And you also want the range to be at least 30% of the height of an average daily range, but not more than 50%. If this opening range is more than half of an average day's range, and then you get a breakout, the day is probably going to remain in a trading range and not go for a measured move. Opening range in breakout mode. Bulls will buy on a stock above. Bears will sell on a stock below. The Bears got their breakout. Other traders will sell on a stock below the pullback after the breakout. Here it's a double top bear flag. It's also a lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend, strong bear breakout. Couple legs up, one pullback, two. And a second entry short, one and then two. And a double top lower high. Reasonable swing short. As I said, this is a reasonable buy for the bulls. It's a 50% pullback of the rally from yesterday's close. And it's a double bottom with this low. At the moving average, it's a reasonable buy. It's common for the market to become always in long, even when the market's in the swing short. That's what happened here. So a lot of the bears who sold here would get out immediately above this strong bull bar, knowing that it's a double bottom bull flag at the moving average and a possible low of the day. But if they did, they can sell again below this bear bar. Or they can sell again as the market again falls below the initial range. This pink box. Or they can sell a breakout below that low. Strong breakout. Probably get at least one more leg down. Traders will therefore sell a pullback. We have a bear flag at the moving average. They'll sell the reversal down. Two legs up here. Same thing, bear flag. Series of bear bars. Sell closes. Sell for any reason. You can see very steep moving average. This is a gap down from below yesterday's close. And now we're getting a reversal up. After the first bar, we have a new high reversal down. We have a reversal up. Breakout mode. But the range is big. You do not see the bar to the left. But the range is big relative to the prior bar. Therefore, traders expect the trading range. And they'll look for breakouts to fail. They'll buy on a reversal up. Or a second entry buy here. Finally, when the breakout occurs late in the day like this, it's usually going to fail. When the market is sideways for the first four hours or so, it usually is not going to become a big trend day late in the day. And therefore, traders will expect breakouts to fail and reverse. When traders think that a breakout is going to take place, a lot of times they'll front-run the breakout. In other words, they'll enter before the breakout. For example, here we have a reversal up from a new low after the first bar. And we have a reversal down. So the market's in breakout mode. This sell-off, as strong as it is, is simply a higher low pullback after this strong reversal up. A lot of traders are going to bet that this will remain the low of the day. And instead of looking to buy on a stop above the high, they'll buy a second entry buy here. Remember, this trend line tells us that this is a big gap down and therefore a bear trend. Very strong bull breakout. And this is a higher low major trend reversal and a second entry buy. Traders often will take this buy and not wait to buy the breakout. The market rallied, tested that high, and reversed down. Reversed down from the 60-minute moving average. This is the 20-bar exponential moving average on the 60-minute chart. I have it drawn on the 5-minute chart. The market reversed down, reversed down, reversed down, reversed down. The bulls are going to give up, which they did here. Bears know that the bulls are giving up. They can see all the failures at the 60-minute moving average. And the bears will therefore look to sell. I want to talk a little bit more about the breakout of the 18-bar range. Here we have two reversals down from above yesterday's high and a gap up. Good sell signal bar. It's a reasonable sell looking for a swing down. However, big gap up. Even if you do get a strong sell-off on the open, a lot of traders will look for an opening reversal. A reversal up from support like the moving average or the low of the gap up. Therefore, they'll look to buy a reversal up from around the moving average. A good looking bull bar. A double bottom, maybe slightly lower low. A weak sell-off, bad follow-through after bear bars. A 50% pullback of this rally. This is a reasonable buy for the low of the day. It's also bar 18. Remember I said that if the market breaks below the low of the 18-bar range, it probably will not get above the high of the day. And if it breaks above the high of the 18-bar range, that probably means the low of the day is in. It will not break below the low. Therefore, when the market gets to be around bar 18, bar 15, bar 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, and if it's near the low of the day, bulls are going to buy a reversal up, betting on a breakout above the 18-bar range. Likewise, if it's near the high of the day, around bar 18, bears will look to sell a reversal down, betting that instead of getting a breakout above the 18-bar range, the market's going to reverse down and break below the 18-bar range. Other traders will simply wait for the breakout and they'll buy with the stop above the high of the 18-bar range, or they'll buy pullbacks. Once they have this breakout, only a 10% chance the market's going to break below this low, and therefore the day is either going to be a bull trend or a trading range. In either case, if it goes sideways to down, it probably will reverse back up. Bulls will therefore buy a reversal up. This is the 18th bar of the day and we're near the high of the day. Therefore, some traders will sell a reversal down, betting that the market will fall below the low of the day and fall for a measured move down. The market reversed up pretty strongly here, and therefore taking a sell here is a relatively low probability bet. But the risk is small as well. If a trader sells below this bar, it's a micro double top and a double top, around the moving average, around a 50% pullback from yesterday's sell-off. The risk is small. You sell below the low of this bar, you get filled here, put your stop above, small risk, and that compensates for the low probability. Around the 18th bar, if you get a reversal down and you're near the high of the day, reasonable sell, or you can wait to sell the breakout below the low of the day. The bears who take the sell on the breakout sell one tick below the low of the day, looking for about a measured move down. These bears have a higher probability of making money. However, whenever you have higher probability, your risk reward is worse. Usually your stop is further away. It's a reasonable trade off. These bears are selling a high probability trade. These bears are selling a low probability trade, but with very good risk reward. Both are reasonable sells. Strong reversal up, two legs down, one pullback, two. Fail break up low, the day's low. But market's always in the long. And then a weak sell-off to a higher low, testing the buy signal bar high here or here. A 50% pullback of this reversal. It's reasonable to buy this for a higher low, major trend reversal and the low of the day. Whenever you have a reversal after a big sell-off, the market will often get up to the high of the day, sometimes above, but rarely will you get a big trend day. Whenever the initial move is very big, then you get a reversal. Usually you end up with a trading range day, a swing down and a swing up. If it goes the other way, if there's an initial rally that is about the size of an average day's range, and you get a reversal down, usually you're not going to fall much below the low of the day. Most reversal days become trading range days. Here we got a big sell-off, we reversed up. If we had a big rally and reversed down, it probably would remain a trading range day as well. Big gap down. Reversed up from below yesterday's low, reversed up a second time from below yesterday's low. Reasonable to buy here or here. If you did, you probably would either have lost money or if you used a wide stop, you could have made money, especially if you could scale in lower. Anyway, at this point, we have a double top bear flag, not quite at the moving average, not a high probability short, especially after two good bull bars. This is, I think, low probability trading. Buying above this bar, selling below that bull bar. Buying above the bear doji, selling below the bear doji. Low probability trading. And a lot of traders will wait for clarity. And what they have here is a third push down with a very good bull bar. So now it's a wedge bottom with a very good bull bar. It's a reasonable buy on a stop above that high. This is the 18th bar of the day, this bull bar. Therefore, the low of the 18 bar range is here. The high of the 18 bar range is here. Reasonable to take this buy. You're front running the breakout of the 18th bar, which you ultimately got. And once you get that breakout, only a 10% chance you're going to fall below the low of the day. Therefore, the day is either going to be a bull trend day or a trading range day. This turned out to be a weak bull day. Traders bought reversals up from sell-offs. After the first bar, we reversed down and reversed up and reversed down again. It's a breakout mode pattern. Some bears might sell here. You can see the big bear bar. But when it immediately reverses up like this and you see a wedge up, up, up, up, most bears would get out and most bulls would buy. Even with these reversals, the first reversal down and up only is five bar pattern or so. And too small. Most traders will not trade that. And we have now a reversal up and a reversal down. It's a bigger pattern, but still fairly small. Most traders are not going to sell on a breakout below the low. This bull bar is the 18th bar of the day. Traders, therefore, will look to buy a breakout above the range or a pullback from the breakout. Some traders will front run. We have a good reversal up here from below yesterday's low. And then a bull inside bar here for a second entry buy. Reasonable to buy. Remember, if around bar 18 the market's near the low of the day and it's reversing, especially the second reversal buy, it's reasonable to take the buy. betting that instead of a breakout below the 18 bar range, we'll break above the high. 18th bar of the day with multiple reversals and the range is relatively big relative to what we've been getting. Therefore, higher probability to bet on a trading range and failed breakouts. So instead of selling at a low of the day here, it's better to look to buy, especially if there's a microdouble bottom. And there is. Bear bar, we went up, we went down, and we went up again. Reasonable to buy on a stop above that bull bar or even above that bear bar. We went down, we went up. We went down more, up more, down more, up more, down more. So it's a growing, expanding triangle. And that is another reason to take this buy. It's actually a reason to take this sell. But with this strong reversal up after this strong reversal up, a lot of traders are not going to take that sell, although it's reasonable. Today I talked about two types of trading range patterns that come in the open. The first I call breakout mode. For breakout mode, I'm looking for a new high that reverses down and then a new low, below the low of the first bar that reverses up. Ideally, the second reversal occurs on the tenth bar or later. And this opening range is about half the size of an average recent days range or less. And then next I talked about the breakout of the range of the first 18 bars. In either of these breakouts, once you get the breakout, 90% chance the market's not going to break out beyond the opposite side of the day. So for example, if you get a bull breakout, 90% chance the day will either be a bull day or a trading range day. If you get a bear breakout, 90% chance the day will either be a trading range or a bear day. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of six videos on trading the open. The second one. The second one. The third one. The third one. The third one.