 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading major trend reversal bottoms. I want to begin by talking about how to move your stops when the trend goes your way. And then next, I want to talk about major trend reversals on the open. They often form with fewer bars than what you need at other times during the day. We have a bear trend, a bull breakout, gap bars, a resumption of the bear trend, and now a reasonable higher low major trend reversal. Traders do not want to use the same stop all day. They don't want to take a risk of giving back too much of their profit. And therefore, they raise the stop as the market goes their way. And this means that they trail their stop. After every new breakout to a significant high, especially if the breakout is reasonably strong, they'll raise their stop. If he bought here, the trader would have an initial stop here, maybe below here. And then when we got a bull breakout here, even though this is not particularly strong, he might want to raise this stop from here to here or maybe below this double bottom. This is easier once you have a very clear, strong breakout to a new high. This then becomes a major higher low. Actually, any of these lows is a major higher low. Most bulls would get out if it fell below this small double bottom or below the bottom of this bull breakout. Because the premise is that you're in a bull trend. And if this is a good breakout, it should not fall below the bottom of the breakout. And it should not fall below these higher lows. Any of these higher lows is reasonable. Putting it below the bottom of this bull breakout once this bar closes is also reasonable. For the bears, they're starting to get a lot of doji bars and we're starting to go sideways. And we're getting reversals every few bars. Therefore, the bear trend is evolving into a trading range. This is yesterday's low. We gapped down and we tried to reverse up from below yesterday's low. The bears resumed and got a new low. And now we're reversing up a second time. This is a special type of opening reversal pattern. It's a second failed breakout below yesterday's low. We broke below yesterday's low. It's failing. The bears took control again and they're failing a second time. This is better than a 50-50 trade that you're going to get a swing up. And we did get a pretty good rally here. Three consecutive bull bars. Certainly breaking above a bear trend line. I do not have it drawn. The bears are trying to resume their trend. We have gap bars here. Usually if you get gap bars in a bear trend, the sell-off leads to a major trend reversal attempt. This is also a breakout test of the signal bar high. For the bears, they have a bear breakout and they have a gap. The close of this bar and these lows. But look at the follow-through bar. It's a reversal. This is therefore a failed bear breakout. And the bears who sold will buy back their shorts above this bull bar. And the bulls who did not buy here will buy here. This is a higher low major trend reversal. Remember, this pattern is not a major trend reversal. This is a special type of pattern. It's a second failed breakout yesterday's low. This video is about major trend reversal patterns. So this is the buy for what we're talking about now. Some traders will put their stop right below here. Betting that the bears are getting a failed breakout. The bulls should not allow it to come back here. Other traders will put their stop down here. Both are acceptable choices. If you did take the buy above the high of this bar, you got filled right here. And the market starts to go your way. Your actual risk was to one tick below the low of this bar from your entry price, which is small, the height of this brown box. And two times your actual risk is right here. Mathematically, it's always okay to take your full price price. You take your full profit at two times actual risk. If you do that 100 times, the odds are very, very high. You'll end up with a profit. However, just because it's mathematically acceptable and reasonable to do that, does not mean it's optimal. It does not mean that it's the best, but it is reasonable to do. At least to take partial profits. Here we have a bear bar closing on its low and small expanding triangle. We went down. We have a higher high, a higher high. And this could be the end of the move. It could be a wedge bear flag. We reverse down, we reverse down. And now a third reversal down. And nested within the third leg is an expanding triangle top. It's therefore reasonable for the bulls who bought for any reason to get out of all of their position right here if they want. They can also continue to rely on their stock, hoping that the bear reversal will fail and will continue higher. What do you do up here? We have a bull breakout above a bull channel. 75% chance it will start to fail within about 5 bars. 25% chance it will lead to an even stronger bull trend. We try to reverse down here. And then we're trying to reverse down a second time. If I took this buy and I saw this, a second failed breakout above the bull channel, I would exit below that bear bar. Just in case we did sell off. If it went sideways instead and formed a bull flag, maybe a double bottom, leg one, pull back, leg two, and had a decent bull bar, I would buy again for another leg up. A lot of trading range price action here, all through here, all through here. This might be a second leg trap, leg one, pull back, and then leg two in what could be a trading range. If this is going to be the top of a trading range, and I see a second entry sell with a decent sell signal bar, I do not want to be holding long. Therefore, this is a reasonable location to take profits if you bought here. And because of what I'm saying, the bears will take that short. A good bear bar closing on its low, a breakout, a second attempt to go higher, and it's failing twice. So the breakout failed here when it reversed down below this bar or that bar. The bulls tried to resume, and now they're failing again below a bear bar. And we have a lot of trading range price action, and we're not above the top of the range. We're still possibly within a trading range. So bears will take that sell, looking for a failed breakout and a test of the bottom of the breakout. What about this? We tried to reverse up here and close back down here. Tried to reverse up again, broke to a new low. Tried to reverse up again. Another new low, maybe it's slightly lower low, and we're trying to reverse up a third time. You can call it a wedge bottom if you want. You can call it the second failed breakout below yesterday's low, which it is, and a fairly reliable buy setup. Some bulls will buy above this bar even though it's not a good buy signal bar. Other bulls will wait for consecutive bull bars and then buy closes here or here. And then you get the major trend reversal bulls who will buy above this bar right here. High or low major trend reversal. If you're swing trading and you do not have a clear reason to get out of your trade, you can stay long and rely on your stop. This is a reasonable place to get out of your trade. We've got a wedge or an expanding triangle. One, two, three, inside of a larger three push pattern. Up one, pull back two, pull back three. It's reasonable to get out of your longs here. But if you're trying to trade always in, you have to get long again above a bull bar. You'd buy again above this bull bar to catch that leg up. This is a sell in a tight trading range and a stop entry sell in a tight trading range is a low probability bet. Also, the pullbacks from this low are small. One bar, one bar, two bars. And they're not falling very far. And therefore, this is the start of a small pullback bull trend. Not a very good short. It's a low probability short for stop entry bears. Therefore, the premise that this is a reversal up and a higher low major trend reversal is still valid. And therefore, it's acceptable to rely on a stop either here or here. A lot of traders, a lot of the swing traders, simply ignore this and rely on their stop. As long as there's not a major reversal and only reversals in a tight trading range, they'll rely on their stop below the most recent strong bull leg. Taking a chance that we'll get trend resumption up instead of trend reversal down. Strong breakout. If you bought here, traders will put their stop here. After this breakout, a lot of bulls will put their stop just below here. And then once we start to break out again, bulls will raise their stops here. It doesn't matter if you bought here, here, here or here. Once you're starting to get another strong breakout to a new high, you're going to raise your stop. The swing traders are not going to be fooled by minor reversals. Reversals that are likely only to lead to a small leg in a trading range or a bull flag. A lot of bear bars closing on their lows and it looks like they could be the start of a reversal down. But the channel is fairly tight. The pullbacks are very small. Therefore, these reversals are minor and it's more likely to lead to a trading range. We may pull back down to here, but probably not below there. Or a bull flag and we'll get resumption up. These are not strong reasons to exit longs if you're betting on a major trend reversal. If you bought here or here, you had a lot of profit right here. However, your stop is down here and you have to rely on your stop because sometimes the bears will make a strong attempt to take control. As long as they are unable to get below your stop, then the bulls are still in control. That means more bulls bought this bear close than bears selling that bear close. And the bulls won. They took control back from the bears. Major trend reversals on the open often happen very quickly and have fewer bars than major trend reversals occurring later in the day. Therefore, you have to be quick to diagnose what's going on and quick to enter because things can happen very fast. This is the first bar of the day and we had a very strong sell off. We have five consecutive bear bars, several closing on their lows below their mid points. This is probably a minor reversal. It could be an opening reversal up from below yesterday's low, but it's probably minor. Is this a double bottom or higher low major trend reversal? We only had two bars up and we only had three bars, four bars down. The pattern is very small. Small patterns are usually minor. And it might have been minor until we got this. At this point, the bulls clearly have taken control. We're always in long and we're probably going for some kind of a measured move up. Maybe based upon the height of this low two bear flag, this double top bear flag. Maybe based upon the height of this breakout, the open of the first bar to the close of the second bar, measured move up. At this point, we're clearly always in long. We had a wedge bottom. We had a bear break up below the bottom and we then broke above the top. And the bulls were hoping that this was strong enough buying pressure that if we sell off again, we might get a major trend reversal. It broke above the top of a bear channel and therefore, if we get a resumption of the bear trend, it might fail and we might get a major trend reversal. On the open, 50% of the time, you'll get a strong move one way or the other that reverses. For example, we have a strong move up and reverse down. Now we have a strong move down. 50% chance it's going to reverse up. Do not get locked into what you think is going to be the start of a strong trend. Here we're trying to break below the bottom of the wedge. We're trying to break below the bottom of this bull reversal, but we reversed up. This is the biggest bear bar of the day. It could be an exhaustive cell climax. Usually the reversal up from a sell off that's that strong will be minor. And the bulls usually need at least a micro double bottom or small double bottom if they're going to take control over the day. And that's what they got here. If you want, you can call this a second failed break up below the law of yesterday, below this reversal. A second attempt to reverse up, we tried to reverse up here. Now we're trying to reverse up again. The bear channel is so tight, the bulls needed a second entry. The second buy signal bar has a better body than the first. And second entries are always higher probability. I would call this either a second failed breakout below yesterday's low, a bear breakout that failed, another attempt at a breakout that failed. I would also call it a small higher low major trend reversal. It's a double bottom with a slightly higher low. It's a reasonable buy for a possible low of the day. Pretty good buying pressure. The biggest bar in the past 30 or 40 bars and it's a bull bar closing near its high. We have a bull bar closing on its high here. We have a good sized bull bar here closing on its high and then another one here. And that's a sign that the bulls are trying to take control. If you did take this buy, you buy on a stop above the high of this bar, you get filled right here. Actual risk is below that low. Initial risk is to below this low. Actual risk is very tiny from your entry price right here to just below the low of that bar. Two times actual risk would only be right here. If you're looking for a swing trade, I think that profit is too small. While mathematically it's okay to take that profit, taking a minimum profit is rarely ever the best thing. When you're getting a major reversal and you see a big sell climax like this, you have to be thinking that the market may go all the way up to the top of the sell climax. And therefore taking a small profit, even if it's two times actual risk, is probably a bad idea. Initial risk is always at least as big as actual risk. It's usually bigger. A lot of traders like to take partial profits at two times initial risk, especially when they're trading a major trend reversal. If they buy above the high of this bar, their initial risk is to just below the low of that bar. So about the size of this blue box. Here's one time initial risk. Here's two times initial risk. So it's reasonable to take partial or even full profits. But when you see the market racing up like this, you have to assume it's going for some kind of a measured move up. Maybe from the open of this breakout to the close of this breakout bar up here. And therefore, when you see it racing up, if you were originally planning on exiting at two times your initial risk, you might hold to see what happens. And then maybe in here you decide, okay, it's stalling. Maybe I'll get out part here and hold part for a swing up. We have a reversal, a strong sell off and now a strong rally. 60% chance of some kind of a measured move up. Maybe simply a measured move up based upon the height of this bear flag. We have a low two bear flag, low one, low two. Maybe a measured move up based upon the height of this double bottom. Here's the double bottom. Here's the neckline. Measured move up is right around here. This is so strong. Usually you're going to get a measured move up based upon the bodies. The open of the first bar, close of the final bar. That is the measured move up. Did not quite get there, but got reasonably close. When the market gets near your target and your target is very far from your entry price, you have a big, big profit and you're still possibly in a trading range, it's reasonable to take your profits on a reversal down. We have a bear bar. We have three pushes up one, pull back two, pull back three. Back into this trading range where we went sideways here for about 20 bars, we may start to go sideways here as well. This is a reasonable location to take profits. If you want, you can call it a nested wedge. One push up, pull back. Two pushes up, pull back. Now a third push up, reversing. One push up, pull back. Second push up, pull back. And now a third push up. A lot of times I simply connect the highs of the first and third bar and I don't worry that the second breakout, the second leg up is above the top. I'm just trying to count pushes up one, pull back two, pull back three. And connecting the first and third bar remind me that it's a possible wedge pattern even though it does not have a wedge shape. We ended with a bear trend yesterday and here's the first bar today. We rallied strongly. It's actually a small parabolic wedge. We went up and then we paused. We went up again and we paused and we went up a third time. The bear's got a pretty good reversal down below the bottom of the bull breakout. But look what's happening at yesterday's low. We have a bear trend, a very strong bull breakout. We broke to below yesterday's low and we got a big tail on this bar. The bear's tried to resume and then we have another tail on this bar and we have a bull body. This is a type of major trend reversal. It's a slightly lower low, so a lower low major trend reversal and a micro double bottom. We went down, we went up. We went down, we're going up and it's a good buy signal bar. And we're still in the first hour, hour and a half of the day and therefore this could be an opening reversal. After the first bar we went to a new high and reversed down. Now we went to a new low and we're trying to reverse up. That makes the day breakout mode and it's reasonable to buy the reversal up, especially given it's a failed breakout below yesterday's low, a micro double bottom and a good looking buy signal bar. Very big up, very big down, probably big confusion. Confusion is a hallmark of a trading range. A trading range means we're probably going to retrace a lot of this sell off. Maybe we'll get all the way up here to the top of the sell climax. Trading range also means you want to buy low and look at the potential range. We're low. This is a good location to buy. Strong reversal up, two legs up, one pullback, two. Testing the top of the sell climax, a good location for profit taking. This is a low one, low two, very tight bull channel. Probably going to get a second leg up, but it's more than two times actual risk. You buy above this bar, get filled here. Your actual risk is only right here. This is probably at least four or five times your actual risk. Your initial risk, if you took this by, is probably below here. And this is around two times your initial risk. It's also about a 50% retracement of this sell off. And it's a test of the moving average. And we have a big tail on the top of the bar. And it's a breakout test of this low. You can see the bulls have a strong bull breakout, trying to get a higher low. And then we broke below that higher low and collapsed. So that is the breakout point. This is therefore a resistance area. Test of the moving average, test of the breakout point, test of a 50% pullback. We had a parabolic wedge on the open. And sometimes the market just starts to form a lot of parabolic wedges. They rarely look like wedges, but it's a very tight channel with three pushes. You can even argue that this is a parabolic wedge down. One pullback, two pullback, three, or one pullback, two pullback, three. And we have a wedge up. One pause, two pause, three. And now here we have one push up, a pause, a second push up, a pause, a third push up. And that's another reason to be thinking about taking partial profits. A trading range is likely. We're fairly high up in the range. We're testing the top of the sell climax. And now we also have a parabolic wedge. We have a bear trend. And now we have some gap bars, a strong enough rally so that the bulls have bars completely above the moving average. There are gaps between the lows of the bar and the moving average. And then again here, when you start to get gap bars in a bear trend, that means the bulls are pretty strong. They can put bars completely above the average price. And when you get gap bars and the bear trend tries to resume, you're usually going to try to get a major trend reversal. Four consecutive bear bars, even though there's a good bull bar, a lot of traders will wait for a second entry buy, either above this doji or above this bar. Stop either below here or below here. This is a higher low major trend reversal. It's also a wedge bull flag. We have a bull breakout and three pushes down. One pullback, two pullback, three. Does not matter that the pullback from the first leg down went to a new high. When markets transition from a bull trend into a bull flag or a bear channel, there's often a time when you have components of both the bull trend and a bear trend. This is the start of the pullback, the bear trend, yet the bull trend was still continuing. That's fairly common. A weak buy signal bar, we have a micro double bottom, we have a wedge bull flag. We have a pair of dojis, not very good. The entry bar is okay, but look at the follow through. A tight trading range, four consecutive dojis, six dojis in the past seven bars. This does not look like the start of a strong bull trend. Very tight range, a lot of small sideways bars, a lot of dojis. Because of the absence of a strong rally, a lot of the bulls who bought here will be disappointed by all of this follow through. Disappointment is a hallmark of a trading range. And instead of a bull trend, a lot of these traders are thinking that, well, maybe we're getting a trading range instead of a bull trend. And if we get a test of the top of the range and a reversal down with a decent bear bar, it's reasonable to exit longs. Remember, when you take a major trend reversal trade, 40% chance you're going to get a swing profit. 60% chance you're either going to get a small profit like this or a small loss. For the bears, they see a bear trend, a rally attempt, and then a second rally attempt, both failing. They see this as a double top bear flag, and they're looking to sell a reversal down. They see the tight trading range has lasted about 40 bars, and they're going to conclude that the bull trend is not happening and that whatever rally we got simply led to a trading range and not a bull trend. The bears want to sell high. And here we have a double top with a decent sell signal bar here. Micro double top, up, down, up, down. Reasonable to short, exactly where the bulls will get up. Bear trend, bull breakout, lower low, major trend reversal, second entry buy. When you have a lower low major trend reversal and the market rallies, it's usually followed by a higher low major trend reversal. Here we have a lot of bear bars. The reversal up is probably minor. The bulls probably will need a double bottom. And here we have a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. Break above the bear channel went up for about 10 bars. We have a resumption of the bear trend, and it's failing repeatedly. The bulls took control. The bulls took control. And now they're taking control a third time, and this time with a pretty good bull bar. It's reasonable to take this buy or that buy. If you did not take these buys, it's also okay to take this buy. However, as I said, when you have three, four, five, six bear bars and a tight channel like this, the resumption of the bull trend is probably going to be a minor reversal, leading to a sideways move instead of a strong breakout. When you have this many bars down, usually you're going to get a second leg down, and the bulls will need some kind of a double bottom before they can get a resumption of the bull trend. This is a double bottom. And the double bottom is a higher low. So you can either call this a higher low, major trend reversal. You can call this a higher low, major trend reversal. When we get a double bottom like this, I usually call it a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. And a decent buy signal bar here. You could also take the buy above here and get filled here and put a stop probably below here, maybe below here. If you want, you can also call it a triangle. We have three pushes down one pullback to pullback three. And we've got a bull breakout above the triangle, but a terrible reversal down. And that makes a strong bull trend less likely. I began by talking about trailing stops. If the market goes your way and you have a strong breakout above a prior high, a lot of traders will raise their stop to below the bottom of that most recent strong breakout. That low then becomes a major higher low. As long as the bull trend is forming a series of major higher lows, it's still a bull trend. And therefore it's reasonable to put your stops below those higher lows. If the market falls below those major higher lows, then it's not a bull trend. You are holding long because you believed it's in a bull trend. And now you have proof that it's not. And therefore it's reasonable to get out below a major higher low. I also talked about how on the open, you can get major trend reversal patterns that do not have many bars. The market can move very fast on the open and a pattern that looks minor. In other words, a pattern that does not have many bars can in fact lead to the low or high of the day. So do not be afraid to take those trades. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading major trend reversal bottoms. ... ... ... ...