 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on trends. I'm going to begin by talking about the different types of trends. And then I'm going to be talking about the bull and bear versions of the trends. And finally, I'm going to be talking about traps and breakouts. Traps are failed breakouts. Trends are important because they offer a lot of profit opportunity, but traders need to understand how they operate. And for me, a good starting point is classifying them into different types of trends based upon their behavior. Every trend bar is a breakout. Every series of trend bars is a breakout. So bull breakouts here, bear breakout there, bear breakout here. And every trend is also contained within a channel, although the channel sometimes is not particularly obvious. Here we have a rising wedge channel and we have a falling channel that is also a wedge channel. A breakout. It can be a single bar. It can be a series of bars. Trends are either in a breakout phase or a channel phase. And a breakout is the strongest type of a trend. I sometimes call it a spike. So I would call this a spike and channel bull trend. And every trend bar is also a climax. Climax does not mean the trend reverses or the trend even pauses. Sometimes the climax just gets more climactic and the market just keeps going up. Every trend is either a breakout or a channel. A channel is a weaker type of trend in which there is two-sided trading. So you get bulls in control for a part of it, bears in control for another part of it. And the way you draw channels, it's rarely perfect. The lines are rarely perfectly corresponding to the points in the channel. Every trend begins with a breakout, at least a small breakout. Here we have a gap open. So here's the end of one session, the start of another session. And we have a big gap down. And the gap immediately closed. The market had a series of bull trend bars closing on their highs. Not much overlap between the bars. As soon as this bar closed, a lot of traders just hit the button to buy the market. And you can see the open of the next bar did not fall below the close of this bar. And the same thing here. There's a lot of urgency on the part of the bulls in this particular breakout. As soon as this bar closed, traders did not place a limit order to buy the close. As soon as the bar closed, they hit buy the market. And so the low and open of this bar never fell below that close. So this is a strong reversal up. And every trend bar or series of trend bars is a breakout. It does not matter that you do not see the breakout or understand what the breakout is, but that's how you have to think of it. You can think of this as a very steep, bear trend, and we broke above it. So I could draw a trend line from this high to this high, and we're breaking above it. A series of bull trend bars, good-sized bodies closing in their upper halves. Here, they're closing near their highs. And it could be one bar. It could be many bars. We gap down, which is a bear breakout. And then we reverse up, a bull breakout. And then we reverse up, a bull breakout. This is a very strong breakout, very strong bull bars. No tails on the bottom, closes on the high. Very small tails on top. Sometimes a breakout is made up of less impressive trend bars. For example, we have a breakout here and another breakout here. And this one contained a doji, small bar, closing around its middle. And this one had a doji here and again here. It's not as strong as the other one, but it's still a breakout, and it's still a strong bull trend. You want to see most of the bull bars closing at least above their midpoints, preferably at their highs. And it's stronger yet if there's very little pullback below the close of the prior bar, very little overlap. Most bear trends begin with some kind of a breakout. Here we've got a breakout. We have another breakout here, another breakout here. And look at this bear trend. It's mostly bear bars closing below their midpoints or near their lows. And we have several series of consecutive bear trend bars. So that's relentless selling. And look at this bar. As soon as it closed, traders hit the button, sell the market. Look at the open and high of this bar. Did not get above that close. So this urgency all the way down. Very little overlap. Very little overlap. And that increases the chances that the market will go lower. Sometimes a small breakout can lead to a big trend. This is the euro versus the dollar, a 10-minute chart. Now look at this. There's time on the bottom. This is a 10-minute chart. And there's price on the vertical axis. It's a two-dimensional chart. Price and time. It's easy to think that breakouts have to begin with price only. A big move in price. Well, they don't. Breakouts can take place over time, made up of lots of small bars, as is the case here. After 20 or 30 bars, you have to conclude that even though we're not getting huge bars, it's still a bear trend. Look how tight the channel is. Look how small the pullbacks are. They do not go up very far. They only last one, two, or three bars. And on a higher time frame chart, this is a strong breakout. Breakout. We have a little breakout here. A gap between this high follow-through bar and this low, the bar before this small breakout bar. You can get a small breakout, and it can lead to a relentless trend that can go on a long time. And channel. And channel. Here, the channel is maybe 30 bars without a pullback. Whenever you see an endless pullback like this, we have a bull trend. And initially, the bull saw it as a pullback, yet it's a never-ending pullback. It's an endless pullback. And once you get 20 or 30 bars down, you have to be thinking at some point, the bulls give up. And you can get a big bear breakout. That becomes a measuring gap and leads to a measured move down. Here, the bulls finally gave up. So it's no longer a bear channel bull flag. It's now a bear trend. We have a big breakout bar and a big follow-through bar. Typically, that's what happens when you have an endless pullback and finally the bulls give up. Usually, you get a pair of big bear bars closing near their lows, and it usually becomes a measuring gap, and the market typically falls for a measured move down. Here, we have what the bulls think is a bull flag, but it just keeps growing, growing, and growing. And then we have a breakout below the bottom of what was a bull flag, and the market fell for about a measured move down. Well, it's no longer a bull flag once these two bars come, and now everyone concludes that it's a bear trend, and it probably will fall further, and this probably will end up as a measuring gap. There are many different types of trends, and they behave differently. So it's good to distinguish the differences among the different trends, because you trade them slightly differently. In general, especially if you're starting out, it's better to only swing trade. Once you think the market is going up, here we've got a bull breakout and a small double bottom, this bar to that bar, a bull close. So you buy there, and you stay long until there's a good reason to get out. And this is not a good reason. Neither is this triangle, three pushes up, one, two, three. And these reversals are not strong enough for the bears to take control, so the bulls hold long. You need a good reason to exit, and these are not good reasons to exit. Trends behave the same on all time frames, and it doesn't matter what time frame you're using. On intraday charts, I use some names that are different, but there are corresponding types on the daily chart. So sometimes, if we gap down here and just started trending up from the open, I would call it a trend from the open bull trend. On a daily chart, instead, I would probably just call it a tight bull channel. And if this were a five-minute chart, and this was the open of the day, I would just call it a trend from the open bull trend, or possibly a small pullback bull trend. Now look at this chart. We have a spike, pullback, and you can call the whole thing a channel, or you can call it another spike in channel, or another spike in channel. And just about every trend, at some point, has a spike in channel pattern. It has a breakout and then a channel. If this is a gap down open, or if this is the open of the day, and we did this, you can call it a trend from the open bull trend. It's clearly a spike in channel bull trend. And again, almost all trends have some component of a spike in channel to them. But if this is a trend from the open bull trend, they happen about once a week on an intraday chart. It could also be a trending trading range day, where the market breaks out and then forms a big trading range. Although in this case, it has not yet formed a trading range. You can argue there's a trading range here, trading range here, trading range there, and it's a trending trading range day. Typically, a trending trading range day just has a couple trading ranges. And if you start to get four trading ranges like this, I don't use that term, trending trading range day. Instead, I would call it a spike in channel bull trend. I would call it a trend from the open bull trend. If this is the open, it clearly trended from the open. And I would also call it a spike in channel bull trend, where this is a spike and then channel. We had another spike within the channel forming another channel. Is it a broad bull channel? Well, it's fairly broad. So you can also call it a broad bull channel. And there are other types of broad bull channels like wedges and stairs. If it's a small pullback bull trend, this is really not a good example because the pullbacks are too deep. Small bull pullback bull trends are the strongest types of bull trends, and they occur a couple times a month. This is, I think, more of a spike in channel bull trend. Spike here, spike here. Or you could say the whole thing is a spike and then starting to channel up. And I would not call it a trending trading range day. It's also a broad channel. The pullbacks are fairly deep, and it spends a lot of time going sideways. That's characteristic of a broad channel. On the downside, we have a bear breakout and then a channel. A bear breakout, pullback here, bigger pullback here, and then a channel. Again, most bear trends have a spike in channel bear trend within them. If this is the open of the day, then it's also a trend from the open bear trend. And here we have a trend and a trading range, and the bear trend resumed. It's also a trend resumption bear trend. All bear trends have a spike in channel component. Is this trending trading range day? Not really. We only have one trading range. We have a breakout, did not form a second trading range. Is it a broad bear channel? Well, not really. You can argue that this is a broad bear channel. But to me, this is more of a strong breakout trading range than another strong breakout. Is it a small pullback bull trend? No, this pullback is too deep for this to be a small pullback bull trend. I would call this a spike in channel bear trend. If you want, you can call it a trend resumption bear trend. Okay. Let me talk a little bit more about bull and bear trends. There are many ways to classify trends, but usually one is the dominant type on the chart. If this is the open of the day, you can call it a spike in channel bull trend. You can call it a trend from the open bull trend. You can call it a tight bull channel. It is pretty tight. You can also call it a trending trading range day. We have a trading range, a brief breakout, and another trading range. The pullback overlapped the lower range, and then we resumed up again. Again, all trends begin with some kind of a breakout. And then it has a pullback here, or you can call this whole thing a pullback. And then you get a channel. So here we have a breakout, a spike, and then we have a channel. And again, sometimes it's not obvious what the channel is. And did the channel begin here? Did it begin here? Did it begin there? It doesn't matter. Some computers will use any of those three. Bear trends also usually can be classified more than one way. This is a good example of a small pullback bear trend. If this is the open of the day, it's a trend from the open bear trend. Very tight channel here, so it's a breakout on a higher time frame. It's a spike in channel bear trend. Look at the pullbacks. They only last a bar or two. And the market just continues down in a very tight channel. So it's a tight bear channel. And it's also, I think, a small pullback bear trend. I would call this a small pullback bear trend. All the pullbacks are really small. It's the strongest type of bear trend on a higher time frame chart. This entire sell-off is a breakout, a bear breakout. Again, a bear micro channel lasting about 10 bars or so. It's a breakout on a higher time frame chart. It's a spike, and then we have a pullback, and then a channel. So it's a type of spike and channel bear trend. And all trends have some component of spike and channel bear trend to them. But this is mostly a small pullback bear trend, and it's better to only short. I want to talk a little bit about getting trapped into bad trades, getting trapped out of good trades. Talk a little bit about breakouts as well. At some point, you look at this and you say, yeah, it's a bull trend. All right, so if it's a bull trend, don't sell. Don't be selling highs. Don't be selling reversals down, especially a trend like this where the pullbacks are so small. So it's really easy to get trapped into shorts. You sell, and immediately it reverses up, trapping you into a loss. It's also easy to get trapped out of longs. You say, well, it's doji's, bear bars. It doesn't look all that strong. I'll wait for a deeper pullback to buy. And the market just keeps going up. Beginners, they love to sell bull trends. Oh, maybe we're reversing. Buy climax. We have a double top here. We have a wedge here. We have another wedge here. They're always looking for reasons to sell. And there's only one reason why they are selling. It's because they are afraid of risk. They equate losing their account with death, the death of their dream as a trader. And so all they focus on is risk. They do not focus on probability. And that's a terrible mistake because some days are small pullback bull trends or strong bull trends. And yes, the risk shorting is low and small. So you sell below this bar, and you're not risking much. But you keep losing. Yes, the risk is low, but the probability is extremely low. It's impossible to make money or consistent money selling in strong bull trends. Okay? So beginners keep selling, saying, oh, I'm not risking much. Selling, not risking much. But all of those small losses add up. And anytime you're taking a trade with low risk, you also are taking a trade with low probability. And it's very difficult to make money if the probability is very low as it is selling in a strong bull trend. You just keep getting stopped out. Beginners only think about risk. And therefore, they end up only selling when the market's in a bull trend because the risk is small. And they only end up buying in a bear trend because the risk is small. And they totally ignore probability. And they end up losing money because the probability is too low to be able to trade profitably. Once you think the trend is up, don't get trapped into repeated shorts. Don't be selling. You just keep looking for buy opportunities. And strong bull trends rarely have good-looking buy opportunities. This is not a good-looking high one. Neither is this. That's not a good-looking high two. We got a bear reversal and a doji. Not good-looking. But the signal bars, even though they do not look good typically, they're reliable. The probability is high. So experts buy and they just decide where the correct stop is. Bull breakout. Not much of a strong bull breakout here. So the stop is still down here. So you've got to buy. You've got to allow for the possibility of a deep pullback. But you have to buy. And you just use the correct stop and trade small. Every time you see the market trying to resume back up, you buy. And the stop is way down here. So you trade small. And then after you get a strong bull breakout like this, then this becomes a major higher low. You can raise your stop from here up to there. So when you're buying over here, your stop is now down here. And beginners, they don't buy. Because even buying here, for them, the stop is too far. They don't want to risk that much. So they keep shorting where the stop is closer. And they keep losing because the probability is so low. Look at this. Strong bear trend. You can only sell. But it's really easy as a beginner to get trapped into longs. You keep buying, betting that the reversals will give you at least a scalp. And you're buying because the risk is small. Maybe you buy above this bar. This bull inside bar for a stop just below. And you say, okay, I got stopped out and did not lose much money. But if you do it again here and here and here and here, you end up losing a lot of money. A lot of small losses can add up to a lot of money. And then beginners, they also get trapped out of taking shorts because they keep waiting for bigger pullbacks to sell and they never get short. A strong trend like this traps beginners into longs. They keep buying because they're concerned that they don't want to take trades where the stop is far away. And they never short because they know the stop is way up here and they don't want to risk that much. Only focusing on risk and ignoring probability, you will lose money. The trader's equation has three variables, risk, reward, and probability. Beginners typically only think about risk and they're buying constantly, even in a very strong bear trend. They just keep buying reversals up and they get quickly trapped into a losing trade. The market resumes back down. And eventually, they wipe their account out. In a strong bear trend, the signal bars rarely look good. You want to sell below that bull bar? Well, it's not that good looking a sell, but it's a strong bear trend. Below this bull bar, small doji. The sell setups never look all that good. However, the chance of a reversal up is small. And if you do get a reversal up, it'll be minor and you'll test back down. Experienced traders use the appropriate stop, sell at any time, any reason. And they take these sell signals, even with the bad sell signal bars, knowing that the odds are if the market goes up, it will not go up that bar. So when you're trading in a strong bear trend and you're looking to short, you can sell at the market. You can sell with stops. But if you're taking stop entry shorts, which is fine, and most beginners should do that, the sell setups never look good enough. Yet the market continues down. The key is using the correct stop, which means risking more than you might like to risk. However, that's the only way to trade this. So use the correct stop and trade very small. The beginners, they don't sell because they don't want to use a stop that far away. The risk is too big. And because they are so afraid of a stop this far away, they get trapped out of very profitable shorts and they miss the entire trend. When I see a bear channel, I immediately think bear channel, bull flag. 75% chance there's going to be a bull breakout. 25% chance there'll be a bear breakout and the trend will accelerate downward. We have a spike down, a micro channel, a breakout, higher timeframe, and then a channel. So channel usually evolves into a trading range. 75% chance you're going to get a break above this trend line. I think of every bear channel as a bull flag, even if it's a bear channel and a bear trend. Because 75% of the time, you're going to get a bull breakout. Usually not as dramatically bullish as this, but still 75% of the time, a bear channel is a bull flag and you get a bull breakout. Typically when you have a spike in channel, bear trend like this, so spike in channel, you get the bull breakout. It tests around the beginning of the channel. Here we went quite a bit above. And then you end up evolving into a trading range. So down and up and up and then down and sideways. And then after you have the trading range, the market again decides on the direction of the breakout, up or down. And it can be in either direction. Anytime I see a bull channel, I think bear flag. 75% chance you get a bear breakout. Does it become a bear trend? Not necessarily. It can break out simply by going sideways. But bull channel, bear flag. 75% chance of a bear breakout. So I always think of every bull channel as a bear flag, expecting a bear breakout and a conversion into a trading range, sometimes into a bear trend. As it was here. And usually the market tries to test the beginning of the channel, which is down here. And you can see it fell below the bottom of the channel before the buyers came back. And so typically you get a bull channel and then a bear breakout and a conversion into a trading range. And at that point, the market decides whether to break out again to the upside or to the downside. In this video, I talked about the types of trends and why it's important to classify trends into different types because you trade them differently. I then talked about bull and bear trends. Finally, I talked about traps and breakouts. How beginners tend to get trapped out of good trades and trapped into bad trades. And I also talked about breakouts of channels. Every bull channel is a bear flag. 75% chance there'll be a bear breakout. Every bear channel is a bull flag. 75% chance there'll be a bull breakout. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on trends. This is the third of five videos on trends.