 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Rating Course. This is the first of four videos on gaps. I want to begin by what I mean when I talk about a gap. I use a very broad definition. For me, a gap is a space. It's a space between the current price and any support or resistance. For example, support or resistance, it can be the high, low, open, or close of any bar, the current bar or prior bars, any moving average, trend lines, trend channel lines. And a lot of times, the support or resistance can be minor, yet it turns out that the gap is important. At the close of this bar, there's space between its high and a prior high. It's high and the high of this lower high and of the high of the prior bar. Those are all gaps. For example, this is a gap between this close and that high. The close of this bar is slightly above the high of this bar. A gap between this close and these highs as well. The low of this bar did not fall below the high of this bar. Therefore, there's a gap here. Here's a moving average. It doesn't matter what moving average. There's a space between the low of this bar and the moving average. That is, therefore, a gap. There's a space between the low of this bar. There's a gap. There's a space between the low of this bar and that high. So that's a gap. There's a space between this low and that high. And therefore, another gap. There's a gap. There's a gap. There's a gap. There's a gap between the low of this bar and the close of the prior bar. This open is slightly above that close. And therefore, there's a gap. Exhaustion gap. A big trend bar, late and a bull trend. Usually, the gap will close. The gap between the close of the big bull trend bar, which will end up as the exhaustion bar, and the high of the prior bar. And you can see that there's a gap between the close of the big bull trend bar. And the high of the prior bar. And you can see we traded down below that high. It closed the gap. And that made this bar an exhaustion gap bar. Exhaustion gap does not mean trend reversal. It just means the bulls are exhausted and they usually wait a few bars before buying again, which they did. This is a buy signal bar. And the bulls bought. This is a test of that buy signal bar high. And there's a gap between the low of this bar and the high of that bar. I want to talk a little bit about traditional gaps. For example, this is a daily chart. Does not matter what market, but it's a daily chart. You can see that the low of this big bull trend bar did not fall above the high of the prior bar. That is a traditional gap between the low of a bar and the high of the prior bar. That's a gap up. A gap down is a space between the low of a bar and the high of a bar right here. A gap up is a sign of strong bulls. Here's a gap down. And it's a sign of strong bears. The market actually opened down here, rallied strongly. It was unable to get back above yesterday's low and then sold off to a new low later in the day. And this is the gap down. On daily charts, gaps are common. These green boxes are gaps up and then the red boxes are gaps down. They usually do not have much significance. They're less common on weekly charts and extremely uncommon on monthly charts except very thinly traded markets. And they're also less common on Forex charts, although you sometimes see gaps on the Forex charts as well. On five minute charts of very liquid markets, markets that have a lot of volume, gaps are rare. Gaps on the daily charts of stocks are especially common in trading ranges and they're usually meaningless in trading ranges. They do not have any predictive value. Most breakouts, most gaps, most breakouts in trading ranges ultimately reverse and therefore a gap in a trading range has no predictive value. We have a gap up, a gap down, a gap up, a gap up again, has no predictive value. They're meaningless. Again, a daily chart. We're rallying and then the next day, the low stayed above the high of this bar and it's after a bear trend. This is therefore called a breakaway gap or a breakout gap. You know in hindsight that that's what it is. If you have a trend up after a gap like that, you look back and say, wow, that's a breakaway gap, the start of a bull trend, a gap up early in a bull trend. At the time it happens, you think it might be that way, but we're still in a trading range and we have lots of gaps in a trading range and this could easily quickly reverse within a day or two or three and then be just a meaningless other gap in the trading range like all of these other gaps were. We sold off. We have a gap down. We have a gap down. Whenever you have gaps, you're always going to be thinking that they could lead to measured moves. Only in hindsight, do you know that this was a measuring gap. When you see the market reverse up at just about a perfect measured move target, you know this was a measuring gap. At the time it happened, you wondered if it might be a measuring gap. Here we have a double top with this high and a reversal down. That means the gap is important and maybe it'll fall for a measured move. And when it got down to the measured move target, the bulls bought to get long, high or low, major trend reversal, bear trend, bull breakout, high or low. And the bears bought to buy back their shorts. When you have a gap late in a trend, it often closes as it did here. This went above the low of that bar. And then traders would call it an exhaustion gap. At the time that it happened, you did not know if it was going to be a measuring gap leading to a measured move down. It pretty much did. From here to here, it's almost a measured move down. Once it closes, traders begin to wonder if it's an exhaustion move. This final gap was the last move by the bears before the bear trend ended and converted into a trading range. And then here we have a gap up. This was the start of a rally. You could also call this entire thing an island bottom. We have a gap down, a trading range, and then an island top. Traditional island tops and bottoms, there's no trading that takes place between the two. Here we traded repeatedly around this gap. In my mind, we sold off. We rallied strongly. This is a reversal. We had a gap down at the end of the sell-off, a gap up at the beginning of the rally. I would call all of this an island bottom, even though it's not a conventional island bottom. This is a conventional island bottom. We have a gap down and a gap up, and there's no trading in between. Once the market moves above the top of the gap, and the gap is late in a trend, traders would call this a closed gap, and they would call it an exhaustion gap. Lots of other gaps are common, especially in trading ranges, and traders call them gaps or common gaps. On this slide, I'm talking about the traditional definitions of gaps. As I said on the prior slide, I have a much broader definition of a gap. And mine, I think, is much better for traders. I mentioned island tops and bottoms. If the market gaps up and then gaps down, it's an island top. Traditional trading, you want the two gaps to be at the same level, and you don't want any trading taking place in the gap up before you get the gap down. But for me, if it gaps up and then down, it's an island top. This is a bigger island top, gap up and gap down. We gap down, gap down again, and gap up. This is an island bottom. If you want, you can call these two bars as an island bottom. Island bottoms sometimes lead to big trends. Here we get an island top and a big sell off, an island bottom and a big rally. But most gaps are meaningless. Does it matter that this is an island bottom or that this is an island top? No, it's simply a reversal. And it's no more important than any other reversal. When you see it happening, you're wondering if it's the start of a swing here. You wonder if it's the start of a trend up. But you don't know until after you get a series of strong bull bars. And at this point, you don't care if there are gaps or just two or three big bull bars. You know the market's reversing up. So the gap really adds nothing to what you're doing as a trader. It's simply a reversal. We sold off. We rallied. The market's reversing. And therefore, traders are looking to buy. Some charts rarely have gaps. When that's the case, you look at every reversal as a variation of an island top or bottom. It does not matter that we have a gap down, another gap down, a gap up. All that matters is the market went down and now it went up, whether or not there are gaps. Most reversals fail. And therefore, most island bottoms and most island tops do not lead to trends. Here we have an island bottom. And you can see we closed the gap over here. And therefore, the island bottom failed. I mentioned that the gaps do not have to be at exactly the same level if you're talking about islands. Although, a lot of the textbooks will say that the gaps have to be exactly the same level. Here we have a gap up and a gap down. To me, this is an island top. I don't care that this gap is far below that gap. Here, this is more of a traditional gap. We have a gap down and a gap up. And there's a space you can draw a line right between the two gaps and there's no trading taking place. This is a traditional island bottom. It's no more important than any other type of island top or island bottom. And you can see it resulted in a trading range and not a bull trend. For me, island bottom, we have a gap down, a gap up. When I see that, I think that this could be the start of a bull trend. And it makes me get ready to buy if I have not bought already. But again, it's no more important than any big reversal whether or not there is a gap. A two-bar island bottom. You can also call this whole thing an island bottom. Gap down and then gap up or gap up. So island bottom with these two gaps. Island bottom with this gap and that gap. Island bottom with this gap down and that gap up. An island can be a single bar or it could be 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 bars. For example, we gap down, we gap up. This is an island bottom. It resulted in a trading range. This entire thing I mentioned earlier is an island bottom. We have a gap down at the end of a trend, an exhaustion gap. We have a gap up here and it led to a bull trend. And therefore, I would call this whole thing an island bottom. I would not consider that particularly important. What's more important to me is we sold off, we reversed up. It's a reversal. I don't need to know that it's an island bottom for me to want to buy. A lot of times when you have island bottoms and tops, there are many gaps to look at and many ways to draw them. For example, this whole thing is an island bottom, but within it there are other island tops and island bottoms. I said that I don't care if there's an island top or an island bottom or an exhaustion gap or a breakout gap. All I care about is momentum. For me, every trend bar is a breakout. Every trend bar is a gap, even though you don't see an actual space. Every trend bar is a climax. Here, I talked about this. There's a gap between this close and that low. A gap between this close and any of these lows. A gap between this close and that low. Those are all gaps. Here, there's a gap between this low and that high. This low tested this high, so it tested the gap. Here, we have a very strong series of bull bars. In my mind, it's no different from ten bull bars with a lot of gaps in it or one bull bar with no gaps. Any bull bar, any series of bull bars is a breakout. It's a climax and it's a gap. Gap between this close and this high. Gap between this close and this high. Gap between this close and that high. Strong bull breakout. Every bull trend bar, every series of bull trend bars, I think of exactly the same as I do a gap. It's also a breakout. It's also a climax. But a climax can go a long way before there's a pause. A buy climax and it turned out to be the end of a swing up. We traded down for about 40 bars. We have a big bear reversal breaking below the bottom of this channel. A wedge. One, two, three. It's a trend bar and therefore it's a breakout. And there's usually a gap associated with it if it's the start of a bear trend. For example, a gap between the close of this bar and the low of that bar. A gap between the high of this pullback bar and the low of that bar. Sometimes you get these really small gaps. For example, the close of this bar and the high of that bar. If you're not familiar with these things, it's easy to ignore them. But they're important, especially if you get several of them. They're a sign of strong bulls. Big bear breakout below this low below all of these lows. But immediately reversed up. The gap between this close and that low closed over here. And therefore, this bear breakout, this bear trend bar, is also an exhaustion gap. We have a bull breakout here. The low of this bar is above the high of these bars. There's a gap. Therefore, traders will look at the bottom of the gap for a possible measured move up. And they'll look to take profits around the measured move target. This theoretically could have been a double top. We could have rallied here and sold off. I look at it as a potential double top. If it did reverse down, traders will look at the neckline for a measured move down. Just like the height of this would have led to a measured move down because of a double top. If we break above it, I look for a measured move up based upon the height of this sell-off. Every gap is a trend bar. Every trend bar is a gap. This is the E-mini chart. It gapped up on the open. This is the cash index one minute chart. Cash index often does not have gaps. If you're looking at the cash index, you'd say, wow, that's a pretty big two bar breakout. However, if you're trading the futures contract, you have a big gap opening. And to me, it's the same. I don't care if it's two big trend bars. I don't care if it's a gap. They're the same. It's a quick move up. The market's deciding that the price is wrong and it has to go up quickly. Whether there's a gap or a trend bar or a series of trend bars, it doesn't matter. They're telling me the same thing. The market wants to go higher. This is the gap opening on the one minute futures chart. And then this is the big bull trend bar on the cash index chart. This is the euro versus the dollar five minute chart. And this is the FXE. It's an ETF that tracks the euro. And you can see they're doing basically the same thing. One big difference is we have gaps on this chart. At the time I made this chart, the volume was not particularly heavy in the FXE. And whenever a chart does not have a lot of volume, it tends to have a lot of gaps. This gap down corresponds to this bear bar. This gap down corresponds to this bear bar. We have a gap down here and a bear bar. That gap and bear bar corresponds to this bear bar. If I'm just looking at the euro, I'm not seeing the gaps. If I'm just looking at the FXE, I'm seeing gaps. And they mean exactly the same thing. Whether or not you see gaps or whether you simply see trend bars, a trend bar is a gap. A gap is a trend bar. And I trade them exactly the same way. We have a very big bull trend bar closing far above the high of the prior bar. And far above the high of the past 20 or 30 bars. Therefore, there's an increased chance that it's the start of a bull trend. There's a gap between this close and this high, that high and this high. It's probably a breakout gap and it's probably also a measuring gap. The low of this bar stayed above this high and above that high. This space is probably going to lead to a measured move up. From this low to this high. And the market will probably go up for a measured move. A breakout bar. You can call it a bull breakout. You can call it a gap. Because there's a gap between this close and these highs. When the bar is big like this and it closes far above a lot of bars to the left and it closes near its high, it's more likely going to be the start of a move up. Chances are the move up will have at least two legs. Bulls will buy the first pullback. And the bears who sold, hoping the breakout would fail, will use the first pullback to buy back their shorts for loss. A breakout bar, a gap bar, has a higher probability of leading to a trend up if it closes above a lot of resistance. For example, if there was a big bear trend line coming down here. Here, closing far above a lot of prior highs. That is significant. That increases the chances that you're going to get follow through buying. Gaps between this close and the high of the bar before it. And above any of the prior highs. Those are all gaps. This close is above that high. And therefore, this is a gap as well. Another sign of strong bulls. I would call these two bull bars a breakout. A two bar bull breakout. If you want, you can also call it a gap. This bull bar became a measuring gap. Although you cannot see it on this chart. The odds are high that we got a measure move up from this low to the low. To right around here. The middle of that bull bar. We have a breakout at the start of a bear trend. A bear breakout. This close is a little bit below that low. Maybe not. Maybe around the same price as a tail. But here we have a bigger bear bar closing on its low or near its low. And well below the low of this bar. These three bear bars reversed this rally. We're getting a bear reversal. And three consecutive bear bars closing below their mid points. One closing on its low. Two having good bear bodies. We're probably going lower. There's a bull trend line here. And we're breaking below the bull trend line. The bigger the bar is, the more it closes on its low. The more bars to the left it closes below. The more likely we're going to go lower. It closes below the trend line. So there's a gap between its close and the trend line. The gap between its close and the low of the prior bar. The gap here. And then we have an even bigger bear breakout. And there's a gap between its close and the low of the prior bar. The gap between its close and the low of the prior bar. The gap here. And then we have an even bigger bear breakout. And there's a gap between its close and the low of the prior bar. Its close this low. Its close that low. We have a four bar bear breakout. If you want you can call it a gap. You can call it a breakout. You can call it a reversal. Strong enough momentum so that there's going to be at least a second leg down. Two big bear bars are going to be at least a second leg down. Two big bear bars closing on or near their lows. Breaking far below the trend line. You could call these two bars alone a breakout or a gap. At a minimum, traders will look for a measured move based upon the open of the first bar of the breakout to the close of the final bar of the breakout. Here it's a two bar breakout. And then we have a breakout. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. And the gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. The gap here. And the gap here. The gap here. The gap here. It's a two bar breakout. The market's probably going to fall for a measured move from this open to that close. So somewhere down here. We have a breakout. A close. Well above this high. A very big bull bar closing on its high. The bear's trying to get a reversal. But this low stayed above the breakout point. We have a gap. And then a bull close. It looks like we're going higher. We're probably going up for a measured move. Maybe simply from this low to that high. Probably from the start of the bull trend to that high. This is probably the middle of a move. And bulls will look to take partial profits at around a measured move up. The measured move can be from this low to this high. Or from this low to the middle of that gap. You don't know in advance. This gap is very small. So the target would be about the same. Whichever price you use for your measured move up. This would be the target. And you can see when the market got there. Bulls started to take profits. This tail means bulls started to take profits right below the target. And then here they clearly took partial or full profits. When you see a gap like this. And you see it get tested. And you see the market is starting to reverse up. It's probably going to reach the measured move target. So traders will look to buy. And then take partial profits or full profits at the target. Big bear bar closing on its low. Closing below the low of the past prior bars. Traders will look to the low of the bear trend here. To the top of the gap here. Or from the middle of the gap here. And then the bulls tried to reverse the bear breakout. But failed. We closed down below the midpoint of this bar. So we have a bear follow-through bar. That increases the chances that we're going lower. It also increases the chances that this will be a measuring gap. Between this high and that low. Traders will look for a measured move down. From the top of the bear trend here. To the top of the gap here. Or from the middle of the gap here. The gap in this case is the high of this bar. And the low of that bar. But it could be the high of a bar two or three bars later. Or the low of a bar two or three bars. Or even five or ten bars earlier. Top of the bear trend. The middle of the gap. This would be a measured move target. Some computers will use this low. And the target would be a little bit higher. Bear sold. And took profits around the measured move projection. Every bull trend bar is a gap. If you get a big bull trend bar. Late in a bull trend. Usually 20 or 30 bars into the bull trend. But sometimes as early as 10 bars into the bull trend. You have to wonder if it's an exhaustive end of the trend. Instead of a measuring gap. And the start of a strong leg up. At this point we have a gap. This low. That high. This might be a measuring gap. It's not a particularly big bar. But it still could lead to a measured move up. However. We're 10 bars into the trend. The trend is not all that strong. You have to be thinking that. It's possible the gap will close. And the bull trend will end. And the market will enter a trading range. Or possibly even a bear trend. The gap is between two prices. The low of this bar. Which is the low of the pullback bar. And the high of this bar. Which is the breakout point. And the gap is the space in between. The bottom of the bull trend is here. Traders will look for a measured move up. Either based upon the middle of the gap. Or from the high of this bar. They'll look to take profits. Around a measured move up. We have a bull bar. Closing above the high of this bar. And therefore it's a gap. But now we're 30 bars into a bull trend. And we're near a measured move target. This is more likely going to be. An exhaustion gap. And it will close. More likely to be an exhaustion gap. Than another measuring gap. And you can see the gap closed. A couple bars later. The bull trend ended. And converted into a trading range. It might resume again. But a gap. A big bull trend bar. In fact the biggest bull trend bar. In probably 20 bars. Usually is an exhaustive end of the trend. And not the start of a new leg up. Euro versus the dollar. Five minute chart. This is the biggest bear trend. In the trend. And it's occurring. 40 or 50 bars into the trend. It could be a measuring gap. In the middle of a bear trend. But whenever you get the biggest bear trend bar. Occurring 20, 30, 40 bars into a trend. You've got to be thinking that. It might be an exhaustive end of the trend. And not the start of an even stronger leg down. When this bar closed. There are many ways to look at the gap. Maybe from the close of this bar. To any of these lows. Certainly to this breakout point. And here. For the bears. They're hoping this is a pullback. And the bear trend will continue down. The bulls are hoping that. It's a failed bear breakout. And that this becomes an exhausting gap. And that the market rallies and closes the gap. Usually it tries to get. At least a little bit above the. Top of the final sell climax. The middle of the gap. Is here. Possibly a measure move down. From the middle of the gap. Possibly a measure move down. From this high. To that low. We're already at that target. If it reaches one target. Then you look for another. For example. The middle of the gap. The middle of the gap. Even though it's the biggest bear trend bar. 30 or 40 bars into a bear trend. It ended up as a measuring gap. And you can see. When the market got down. To the measured move. Traders took profits. The bulls were not able. To get the market. To go above that bull bar. The probability. After you see. A very big bear bar. And a bear follow through bar. The probability. Is you're going to get. At least a small second leg down. Possibly a measured move down. Another big bear bar. Occurring about 15 or 20 bars. After this one. Another follow through bar. Gaps from this close. To that low. And this low. And this low. All breakout points. But the gaps ultimately closed. And this was an exhaustion gap. Late in a bear trend. An exhaustive sell climax. Does not mean. A reversal into a bull trend. Most of the time. It means conversion. Into a trading range. It might ultimately reverse. But usually. An exhaustion move. Means the bears are exhausted. And they'll stop selling. As aggressively. And the market stops. Going down. Not necessarily reverses. Into a bull trend. Once the gap closed. It became an exhaustion gap. I use the term gap. Differently from just about anyone else. I use it in a way that's useful for traders. A gap is simply the space. Between the current price. And some support or resistance. Most gaps don't mean much. But there are a lot of gaps. That I'll talk about. In the next several videos. That most traders. Are not even aware. Are gaps. Yet. They have predictive value. They help let you know. If there's good selling pressure. And the market's going lower. If there's good buying pressure. And the market's going higher. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching. The Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos. On gaps. The Brooks Trading Course.