 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the final video on chart basics and price action. I will be talking about candlestick patterns. I will talk about what traders talk about. And finally, I will talk some about indicators. I think one of the unfortunate things that beginners see when they start out is a collection of ads and claims on the internet and in books and magazines that make it sound like if you simply memorize a handful of candlestick patterns, you're going to get rich. And it's really deceiving because there's nothing easy in trading. You're competing against the smartest people in the world who are working extremely hard and they are not going to give up their money easily. So if you see ads like this that tell you that you can make an incredible amount of money with minimum work, for example, this one says you can turn $250 into $34,000 completely on autopilot. It's really tempting. Everyone starting out is looking for protection. They're afraid of losing their money. They're looking for someone who's going to take care of them, but nobody's going to take care of them. They're looking for some easy way to make money that's guaranteed to not lose money. And all of the ads imply that all you have to do is memorize a few candlestick patterns and they'll work all the time or they'll work 90% of the time and you'll soon be rich like everybody else, like Warren Buffett. But that's not real. It's just not real. It's misleading. So whenever you see anything like this, just ignore it. Move on to something else. Now, you correctly believe that there are institutions that make a lot of money. There are high frequency trading firms, HFT firms, hedge funds, Goldman Sachs. Most of the firms that are out there making a lot of money are not making them based upon candlestick patterns. And if candlestick patterns were the key to wealth, everyone would be using them to make money. But that's not the reality. Lots of successful day traders talk about their trades. For example, if you watch Fast Money, a television show on CNBC, you'll listen to the traders talk constantly about trends, channels, prior highs, prior lows, support and resistance. And you'll never hear them say anything about a particular candlestick pattern. Like, oh, I sold because of a dark cloud cover, a shooting star or a harami pattern. They don't talk about that because that is such a tiny part of trading that it's not going to make you any money. You have to learn far more than that to be successful. Now, look at this. Here's a candlestick bottom. The market's going down, tries to bottom, tries to bottom again. Can you make money from this candlestick pattern? Of course you can. The way to do it is you don't buy. You wait for a few bars. And then you sell where the bulls will get out. The bulls are trying to buy a bottom. Trends are resistant to change. They're probably going to continue. The bulls who buy here are going to get trapped and lose money. So rather than buy here, look to sell where they'll get out, where they'll get stopped out. So, yes, you can make money trading a candlestick pattern, doing the opposite of what conventional candlestick pattern teaches you to do. Look at this. Here we have a bearish engulfing top on the daily chart. The textbooks would tell you, ah, this bar traded above the high of that bar, and then it closed on its low, and it's a big bear bar closing on its low. It's a short. It's a short. Well, the risk is not all that great. It's to this point. The reward, maybe we come all the way down here. That's good, too. So, great risk-reward. However, what about probability? 80% of reversal attempts fail. So, this failed, this failed, this failed, this failed, this failed, failed. This one looks better than the others, but is it going to succeed? Now, whenever you see a top, you have to expect that the top will fail and become a bull flag. Don't be too quick to sell a top. Instead, you have a better chance of making money if you wait a few bars for the top to fail and become a bull flag and then buy as the trend resumes up. Look at this. Here we have a bullish engulfing bar. It traded below the lows of all of these bars and then reversed up strongly and closed on its high. But you need context. Context means you have to look at all the bars to the left and they have to support your trade. Now, look at these bars to the left. A very tight bear channel with very little in terms of pullbacks along the way. What is the probability that the first reversal up is going to lead to a bull trend? The probability is very low. Yet, you have a great looking candlestick pattern. But the candlestick pattern alone is not enough. It has to be in a context that makes sense. And this does not make sense. This is a low probability trade. So what do you do? Well, you know the candlestick guys are buying, betting on the trend reversal. But the smart guys are saying, eh, it's just a pullback and a bear trend. And therefore, it will fail and become a bear flag. What they do is they don't buy here. They place a sell stop to go short below the bear bar that followed it. Betting that, like most reversals, this one will fail and the bear trend will continue. Markets have inertia. That means they are resistant to change. And there's an 80% chance that they'll continue doing what they have been doing. So, for example, if you want to know what the bars to the right look like, the ones that you don't see yet, look to the left. If we're in a bear trend, chances are we're going to continue in a bear trend. And if we're in a trading range, chances are we'll continue in a trading range. There's much more to a bottom than simply a candlestick pattern. So, if you're in a bear trend, you make more money expecting reversals to fail. You know, we had lots of reversals here. Here, here, here. We try to reverse here and here. Here. Most reversals are going to fail. Every one of those reversals is minor. They are not major trend reversals. They are not going to change a bear trend into a bull trend. They're going to change a bear trend into a bear flag. And then the bear flag will lead to a resumption of the bear trend. My 80% rule, inertia. When the market's in a trend, 80% of reversal attempts will fail. They're minor reversals, and they become bear flags, and they lead to a resumption of the trend down. So, for example, here, we're trying to reverse up. We have a small double bottom. Am I going to buy that bar? No. If anything, I'm going to place a limiter order to sell at the high of the bar. Same here. Here's a bull bar closing on its high. Am I going to buy that close? No. If anything, I'm going to place a market order to sell as soon as I see that big bull bar attempting to reverse up. Because I know the math is it's more likely to lead to resumption down. And that's true all the way down. Every one of the reversal attempts I'm viewing as a bear flag, and I'm looking to sell. Bulls finally got their bounce. The bulls who have been buying all the way down finally made money, but they lost money on all the other prior attempts. And what they make here will probably not be enough to offset their prior losses. And even this is only a minor reversal. When the channel is this tight, you might bounce for 10 or 20 bars, but the odds are you're going to come back down and test this low. At that point, you might get a major reversal. But all of these reversals, including this one, is probably minor. Now, my 80% rule also applies to trading ranges. In a trend, 80% of reversal attempts fail. In a trading range, 80% of attempts to break out into a trend will fail. So, we tried to go to a new high. It reversed down. A new low, reversed up. New low, reversed up. New high, reversed down. New low, reversed up. New high, reversed down. If you see a market having a lot of trading range, price action, don't get excited when it breaks to the downside. You have to assume the downside breakout will fail. And don't get excited when it breaks to the upside. Even when it's breaking strongly to the upside like this, the odds are that it will fail. At least pull back a little. Here, it pulled back all the way to a new low. You know, trading is difficult to do. I've been trading for 30 years, and it's still difficult, but I enjoy doing it. And I'm very peaceful when I do it. When traders start out, they quickly learn that they lose money. You know, no matter how hard they try to trade really well, no matter how much they know about candlestick patterns, they're losing money. So, they realize they're missing something. For example, here, a sell, a sell. But the market keeps going up. You know, what they're missing is understanding context. And context means all of the bars to the left. And what the market has been doing prior to the current bar is far more important to what the current bar looks like. Candlestick patterns alone are useless. And if anything, when you're starting out, you'll lose money because you'll constantly be betting that trends will reverse. And you'll constantly be betting that trading ranges will break out. And 80% of the time, you're wrong. You're taking 20% bets. And it's virtually impossible to be making money if you win only 20% of the time. After traders lose enough money, they start to look for help. They're desperate to believe in anything. And there are lots of well-intentioned people out there who want to help you. But a lot of them are dishonest. And a lot of them teach you that knowing candlestick patterns is the only road to making a fortune as a trader. And that's simply not the case. Here, good bull reversal bar, buy. No, you don't buy. It's following three bear bars. Look to the left. The market's going down. So, if anything, you're looking to sell. Okay. So, if candlesticks are not the answer, then what is price action? Listen to the traders on television, expert traders, traders who trade for a living. Listen to what they say. They tell you every day what's important. And they virtually never mention a candlestick pattern. So, what do traders talk about? If they're not talking about all these candlestick patterns that you see on the Internet, what are they talking about? How are they making money? How are they making money? How are they making money? One of the most important things that they talk about is support and resistance. And that comes in many forms. Moving averages, channels. Here's the average price. They're interested to see how the market reacts to the average price. We're falling down strongly. And when it gets back to the average price, that's probably expensive. Traders will look to sell. It becomes resistance. Here, we're rallying strongly. When it gets down near the average price over the past 20 bars, 100 bars, it reverses up support. And they also look at channels. Here's a bear channel after a bull breakout. So, it's probably a bull flag. Traders also spend a lot of time looking at prior highs and lows. The market rallied to this point and sold off. It broke strongly above it, came down near that point, and it's now support. It rallied again. It broke below it, tried to get above it again, failed. Tried to get above it again, failed. That high was resistance and then support and then resistance again. In this low, the market broke strongly below it. It tested it, could not get above it. It was resistance. Tried to get above it again, resistance. Tried to get above it again, resistance. Tried to get above it again, resistance. Another thing that traders always talk about is how strong a trend is. For example, if the market's in a bull trend, you want to see higher lows. You want to see higher highs. And if you see that, traders are more inclined to buy. Buy for any reason. In a bear trend, they look at lower highs and they want to see lower lows. And if the market is going down, they're more inclined to sell until there's a clear reversal up. Here, a bear trend, strong bull breakout, higher low, big enough pattern for a major trend reversal, and it reversed into a bull trend. Bear channel, bear trend. Bull channel, bull trend. There are two forces that are very important and they control all markets. First of all is context and momentum. Remember, I said that context means all the bars to the left. You know, where is the support and resistance? I talk about this in a separate video on support and resistance. For example, we're falling here. And if you draw a line across these tops, you'll see that every time it gets near the line, it falls. Even if it gets above the line, it falls. Above the line, it falls. And prior highs and lows are important. We're in a bear trend. You're looking to sell. Well, selling pullbacks is a good thing to do. So if it gets near a trend line and reverses down, that's a good thing to sell. Near the trend line, reverses down. Near the trend line, place a stop order to go short just below the prior bar. And then look at this. Every time it gets near the prior low, it goes up. So there's support at prior lows. Traders will look to buy reversals up. When the market makes a new low, they'll place a stop order to buy above the high of the prior bar. These little green boxes are where they get in. Traders who look to sell at resistance and buy at support are value investors. They want to buy when it's cheap and sell when it's expensive. Now, I said there were two things. I said context and momentum. And momentum refers to the strength of the trend. And the video on breakouts talks a lot more about momentum. Now, look at this. We're falling pretty strongly here, rallying pretty strongly here. When momentum is strong, traders want to trade in the direction of the momentum. So if it's falling strongly, traders should be looking to sell. You could sell even the close of this bar, betting that any reversal up will probably stay below that high and be followed by lower prices. And the same is true here. You could buy the close of this bar knowing that there'll be at least a little bit more up. And here, it pulled back but held above the bottom of the bull trend and starts to turn up again. So traders will buy on the reversal back up. So they'll buy the breakout or the pullback. Here, they'll sell the breakout or the pullback. They don't sell simply here. They sold all the way down. But you can even sell at the worst price and make money. The same with here. Traders don't all buy that close. A lot of them bought all the way up here. That's why we got this strong breakout everybody's buying. Look at here. The market's losing momentum. We have a couple bear bars but they're small. Followed by a bull bar. A bear bar with a tail. A small bear bar followed by a bull reversal bar. The momentum down is getting weak. Compare that to this. And traders are buying every low. Bulls are making money buying every low. Bending that the trend will not fall that much further. The market is transitioning from a strong bear trend into a weak bear trend. And then possibly a trading range, double bottom. And then possibly even a bull trend. So the momentum is weakening. And traders start looking for reversal trades. For example, buy the reversal up. We have a double bottom. Maybe a slightly lower low major trend reversal. We have a bear trend. Strong bull breakout above the top of the bear channel. And then a test of the bear trend low. And a reversal up. And a second and a third reversal up. So that is a reasonable reversal trade to take. I pay a lot of attention to early signs of strength. So we're in a bear trend. But look at this. We have four consecutive bull bars. Two of them with very big bull bodies. All four closing near their highs. Bear trend, yes. But we have a sudden burst of buying. And there's a lot of strength on the part of the bulls. And I refer to that as buying pressure. So I pay attention to buying pressure. Here, here. We sold off strongly, but it reversed up strongly. The market is becoming more bullish. We're getting a lot of buying pressure. And on the way down, I look at selling pressure. We have a lot of bars down. Every bar, the high is below the high of the prior bar. The low is below the low of the prior bar. So we're trending down pretty strongly. Odds are selling for any reason will get at least a little bit more down. Traders also pay attention to the strength of the trend. I told you that in addition to risk and reward, they need to pay attention to probability. And a very important thing is trade management. Once they take a trade, they have to manage it correctly. To make money as a trader, candlestick patterns, that's not the answer. They're basically totally unnecessary. They can be a useful small piece of the big picture, but they're really not important. A lot of institutions trade off line charts. They don't care about the candlestick patterns. They know that the direction of the trend, the strength of the trend, support and resistance are far more important than candlestick patterns. So if you look at this line chart, are you thinking that a candlestick pattern would make it more bullish? Or are you saying, wow, this is going up really fast. Higher lows, higher highs. I've got to buy. Candlestick pattern is not going to make it any more bullish. When you see this, you've got to buy. And a candlestick pattern will not help you. Now, I want to say a few things about indicators. When I first started trading, all the magazines had pictures that looked like this. You know, they tried to stuff as many indicators onto the chart as possible to lead you to believe that if you buy their software that can create all of these indicators, you're going to get rich. You know, you'll have some big advantage that will allow you to make money. Does all of this stuff really help? If one indicator is good, is two, three, four better? Having ten, is that better? The answer is no. In fact, you can barely see the chart with all of these indicators all over the chart. Your eye is going to get focused onto the indicators, and you will not be paying attention to the chart. Here's the same chart with the indicators removed. I can see what's going on. The bulls are trying to break out. We have a big reversal bar. We're probably going to continue back down. Trading range breakout probably will fail. I'm looking to sell. Three pushes down. A trading range breakout below. I'm looking to buy. A triangle. Breakout. A small triangle inside of a bigger triangle. I'm probably going to sell. Strong bear trend. A bull reversal. Probably going to fail. I'm looking to sell. A minor reversal. Possible final flag. Decent buy reversal bar. I'll look to buy. 50% pullback from the sell-off. I'm going to start looking to sell. Okay, we've got the second entry short. We have a small double top here. I'm looking to sell. Small triangle. Failed bull breakout. I'm going to bet that will continue down at least a little bit more. I'm looking to sell. Higher low. Major trend reversal. Fair trend. Bull breakout. Higher low. The sell-off not all that strong. Two legs down. One pullback. Two. I'm going to look to buy. And the indicators don't show me any of that. So for me, I personally prefer just to look at the charts and try to understand what the market is doing. And then I place trades based upon the price action. To me, I don't like indicators. I get stressed out. Constantly looking for reversals and trends. I'm constantly looking for breakouts and trading ranges. And that's the exact opposite of what I should be doing. This is a common thing that you see. Okay. Look at this low and this low in the indicator. So we got a low. We have a higher low. We have a higher low. This is a divergence. This is a double divergence. And the websites will tell you, oh, you got a double divergence. You know, you got to look to buy. Right? Yeah, we got lower prices. And then we have a higher oscillator. You have to buy. No. Look at the bars. You're in a really tight bear channel. With virtually no significant pullback. It's far easier to make money selling. So even though we got a divergence, here's another divergence. Price is going down. Indicators going up. Higher lows. It's crazy. Right? And that's the single biggest problem with indicators for beginners. They look at the indicator for patterns. Oh, a divergence. I got to buy. And they don't look at the chart. When the market's in a small pullback bear trend, you can only make money selling, not buying. So indicators. It's an excuse to avoid thinking about the obvious. So buying in a strong bear trend. Yes. It can work. And you can make a fortune. But. So the risk reward is great. So you buy here. Your risk is here. Very little money at risk. We could go up forever. So your reward is huge. However, what is the probability? The probability is extremely low. So you need much more than risk reward. One of the unfortunate things on television is traders constantly talk about risk and reward. They never talk about probability. But that's the flip side of risk reward. Whenever a trade has excellent risk reward, in other words, small risk, great reward, it also has very low probability. Because there has to be a reason for an institution to take the other side. So if you get great risk reward, guess what? The institution taking the other side of your trade has high probability. He's probably going to make money. Every now and then, you'll make a lot of money. But most of the time, you're going to lose. So you keep getting these small losses. Your indicators are telling you to buy. Buy, buy, buy. Buy, buy, buy. Buy, you lose. You buy, you lose. You buy, you lose. And you're not losing much. Remember, your risk is small. However, you can bleed to death from 1,000 paper cuts. Those small losses add up. You have to be patient. There's a lot to learn. That's why there are so many videos in this course. I'm trying to teach you everything that you need to know to be a successful trader. And there are no shortcuts. Indicators are not a shortcut. Candlestick patterns are not a shortcut. And trading is never going to be easy because you're competing against extremely smart, hardworking people who have been doing this for years. And they don't want to give you a penny. They want to take every penny that they can get. And that's their job. That's what they should do. That's my job. And that's what I try to do every day. But even though it's hard, I really enjoy the challenge. Well, what type of chart? Look at this chart. Okay, this is the euro versus the yen. It's a monthly chart. But when you look at it, if you didn't look at the time axis, you would say, oh, maybe that's a five-minute chart. Maybe it's a one-minute chart. Maybe it's a 60-minute chart. It's a monthly chart. And the point I'm trying to make is some traders do not want to trade intraday. And they'll trade daily charts or weekly charts or monthly charts. It doesn't matter. The process is still the same. The market's going up. Traders are looking to buy pullbacks or they'll even buy breakouts. Okay, we're trying to top. Traders will start to sell. And this process is the same. It doesn't matter what the time frame is. All markets are fractal. Bigger patterns are made up of smaller patterns. Smaller patterns are parts of bigger patterns. It's all the same thing. If you do trade a monthly chart, the bars are very big, so the stop is very far away. You have to trade very small to make sure that the risk on your trade is no bigger than the risk on any other trade. In this video, I talked about candlestick patterns and how they are not particularly helpful. I also discussed what professional traders talk about. And as I said, they talk much more about support and resistance and momentum, the strength of trends, than they do about candlestick patterns. They virtually never talk about candlestick patterns. And I also talked about indicators and how it's very easy to get overly dependent upon them. And if you use them, you'll find that they probably don't help you make any money. I don't have a problem with somebody using indicators if they're making money and if they're happy. But if you're not making money and if you're stressed out using them, then I would get rid of them and just look at the charts. And if you look on television, you rarely ever see anybody putting an indicator up. And that's because most professional traders don't pay attention to them. They pay attention to the price action. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the final video on chart basics and price action. What a webinar is called our самых, how important is a great. We'll put that in the first video. enhanced activity and use, how much strength impact and world Lagannese. And this is the final video on chart basics. Again, I'll change the resource quite a bit. But theру size and energy is 10 times. That's because you have all figures, these are lottery hundred companies. Over to my page action.