 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of six videos on channels. A channel is simply two lines that contain the price action. And to draw a line, you need two points. I'll finally talk about the 70% rule, which means that if there's a breakout of a channel, up or down, does not matter if it's a bull or bear channel, there's about a 70% chance that the breakout will fail and reverse and go to the opposite side of the channel within about five bars. Every market on every timeframe is always contained within channels, whether or not you see them. For example, here we have a very tight bull channel and here we have a broader bear channel. And within each channel, there are also smaller channels. Here we have a broad bear channel. We have lower highs and lower lows. And within it, we have a bull channel. And within that bull channel, there are smaller bear channels. Let's look at this bull channel for a second. There's a line below and a line above. In a bull trend, the line below is the trend line. In a bear trend, the line above is the trend line. In a bull channel, a bull trend, the line above is the trend channel line. In a bull channel, we have two points so we can draw a line. This is the bull trend line. In a bull trend line, we have two points. We can draw a line at the top of the bull channel. And that is the channel line. Now, we have a broad bear channel. And I can draw a line across these two points. And that would be the trend line. And I could draw a line along the bottom. And actually maybe this low and that low or this low. We have three points down here. And the line along the bottom is the trend channel line. So the trend line is on top. It's a bear trend. So the line is on top, the trend line. And the channel line is on the opposite side of the channel. And in a bear trend, it's on the bottom. Here is a five minute chart. And we have a bull channel. I have a reversal up. So that's a point that I can use to draw a line. And then maybe we're trying to reverse up here. So that would be a second point. We have a reversal sideways to down. I can use that to draw a line. We have a little reversal down here. I can use that to draw a line. We have another reversal here, another reversal here. This one, if I were to draw a bull trend line here, this would be a break below that bull trend line. So this is possibly the start of a swing sideways to down. And therefore, this is possible to draw a line. Therefore, this is probably a more important point than these points. I will draw the line connecting this high to that final point, even though when I do that, these bars are above the line. Who knows what is going on on other timeframes? This is the chart that I'm trading. And on some other timeframe, a higher timeframe, the 60 minute chart, a daily chart, a weekly chart, there's probably an opposite trend. So a bull trend on the five minute chart could be a bear flag on a 60 minute chart or a daily chart. Well, look at this. Here's the daily chart. And this little red box is today. You can see it's a bull trend opening in the middle, closing on the high. And that is today. This is not the entire day. This is part of the day. The point I'm making is it's a reasonably strong bull trend, but it's really simply a little pullback in a very strong bear trend on the daily chart. Just knowing that it's a bull trend here does not tell you anything about other timeframes and other timeframes can be in opposite trends. For example, if I were looking at a one minute chart, this would be a bear trend. Now on every timeframe, on every chart, every market channels dominate the market. Every market is always on every chart, either in a trend or in a trading range. Here we have a breakout and breakouts are brief on any chart. A strong breakout typically will be five to 10% of the bars on the chart. The other 90% of the bars will either be in a channel or a trading range. Market cycle, you get a breakout, a channel and a trading range. Here we have a strong breakout and then many more bars are in a channel. I can draw a line. I have two points, two reversals up and then up. And then look what the market did here. It went sideways. But I have two reversals down. I can draw a line across the top. I have two reversals up. I can draw a line across the bottom. And remember my definition of a channel is any collection of bars that can be contained between two lines. A trading range is a channel. It's a sideways channel, a horizontal channel, but it's a channel. I always draw my lines in a way that best highlights what the market is trying to do. Sometimes that results in bars being above or below the lines, extending beyond the channel. Other times that results in reversals that do not quite reach the lines. Here we have a reversal up, another reversal up, another reversal up. Initially I'll draw a trend line and a bull trend connecting these two lows. But then I see a reversal up here and I'll change the line and I'll use this low and that low. When I do that, this bar is below the line. Therefore, this is an overshoot. When I draw a line below here, maybe connecting that low and this low, and then create a parallel. And I want to contain what is actually taking place. To me it looks like this high and this high best illustrate what the market is doing. And if I use those two highs, then this high in between is above the line and it's an overshoot of the channel. A lot of times you don't appreciate overshoots and undershoots until after a pattern is complete. So for example, you would not see this as an overshoot of the bottom of the channel until after the market reversed up here. That's okay. And the same is true here. Initially you draw a line using this high and that high. And then you might decide that this is a better high to use because it creates a parallel channel. And once you do that, then this high becomes an overshoot. It went above the top of the channel. Here, once you have this channel drawn this way, you see the market came down near the line and reversed up. It's an undershoot. Had I drawn the line using this low and that low, then this clearly would be an undershoot. It's still a test of the bottom of the channel, but it did not reach the bottom of the channel. Just like sometimes the test will go beyond the bottom of the channel. Traders are always looking at channels. And one of the reasons is they're looking for transitions. We have a bull trend, very strong breakout, and then a channel. But everyone knows that a channel eventually evolves into a trading range 75% of the time. And if it starts to evolve into a trading range, traders need to know that because they'll trade differently once the market is in a different part of the market cycle. When the market's in a channel, especially a tight channel, traders will only look to buy. But once it breaks below the channel, it might be becoming a trading range, in which case traders will also be willing to sell. Bull breakout evolved into a channel, channel evolved into a trading range. And once it's in a trading range, it's still a trading range in a bull trend. So it's a bull flag on some higher timeframe. Traders definitely have to favor buys. However, because it's a trading range, they'll also be willing to sell. Here we have a bull trend. We're in a channel. A channel is a type of bull trend. And everyone knows that 75% of the time, a channel will evolve into a trading range. A bull channel is a bear flag. 75% chance you'll get a break to the downside and then a trading range or a bear trend. 75%. That means 25% of the time you get a bull breakout and the market cycle starts over. Breakout, channel and trading range. And that's what we had here. We had a strong bull breakout above a bull channel. So the market cycle starts over. Breakout and then channel and then probably a trading range later on. So we had a bull trend that became an even stronger bull trend. We have a bull breakout above a bull channel and the creation of an even stronger bull trend. Breakout, channel, eventually probably a bear breakout below the bull channel and then the formation of a trading range. I can draw a line using a reversal up here, a reversal up there. Here's the bottom of the channel. I can draw a line using this high and that high. Or this high and that high. Or simply a parallel of this line. In any case, we have a big bull bar closing on its high and above the top of the channel. Now, remember 75% of the time a bull breakout of a bull channel will reverse and test the bottom of the channel, which is what it did here. Will this breakout lead to a stronger bull trend or is it a buy climax and a failed breakout that will lead to a reversal down to the bottom of the channel and then either a bear trend or a trading range. In this case, we had a bull breakout above a bull channel and then a bull channel. Traders think of it as a bear flag because 75% of the time you get a break below the bottom of the channel below the bull trend line and either conversion into a trading range or a reversal into a bear trend. In this particular case, we got a reversal into a bear trend. We have a give up bar here, a big bear trend bar closing on its low and it became the spike of a spike in channel bear trend. So spike and then pull back and then channel going down. Here we have a bull trend and a bear trend. And a channel that rises is a bull channel. And this is a breakout initially and then it became a very tight bear channel. Bull channel, trend line below, trend channel line above. In this particular case, I used a parallel. I created this line using this low and that low and then I made a parallel and dragged it over here to some high that best contains most of the price action. A channel going up, bull channel, a channel going down, bear channel. Even though it's very tight, it's still a channel. On a higher timeframe chart, it's probably a breakout. But on this particular chart, it's a channel. Traders are always paying attention to reversals because reversals allow them to draw lines. And as soon as the trader sees a second reversal, he can start to draw lines. This low and that low. Higher low. So it's a bull channel at this point. Initially, when you only have one point above, I start with a trend channel line. So I take this line, I create a parallel and I drag it up to that high. To get some idea of what the bull trend might look like. And then I'll pay attention to what the market does if it gets up near that line. If it turns down from lower, then I'll start drawing a trend line above this high and whatever low we have here. We know there's a channel here, even though we don't have a good point for the second line. The channel right now looks like it's up. We have a higher low. But in fact, it could be down. It could be this high and that low and we could start channeling down. But this is what I'm thinking is a reasonable thing to consider. We have a strong bull breakout and then a reversal up after a weak sell off. Maybe a spike and channel to a higher low. So the odds are we're going to test up. And as I see more bars, I redraw lines. More bars, more information. And then look what happened here. A strong breakout, but terrible follow through once it got to the area of that line. That tells me that the market is aware of this line. A lot of computers are using this line. They created this trend line below. They created a parallel. They dragged it to this high. And this hesitation at that line tells me that a lot of computers think this line is important. Maybe it's a resistance. Maybe we reverse down. Maybe we break above it. We are reversing down here. So, I'm going to draw another line using this high and this high. And I'll wait to see what happens. If we go higher, I'll draw another line. And if we keep getting higher lows here, this line then becomes unimportant. And I'll draw another line with this as .1 and maybe this as .2. Each new bar that gets added to the chart gives me additional information. And then with each piece of additional information, I reevaluate what I'm doing. And that means that a lot of times I'm erasing old lines and creating new lines. All of us learned when we took mathematics that lines need two points. You need two points to draw a line. Here we have a lot of points. Every reversal is a possible point. Reversal up, reversal up, and then a lot of reversal up, and then reversals down. And every one is a possible point that I can use to draw a line. I trade based upon what happens at those lines. Is the market paying attention to the line? When the market gets there, does it break through it or does it reverse? Reversal down, reversal down. I draw a line. Here the market tested the line. It broke through it. Here I have a very tight channel. And again, the market broke through it. Again, a tight, bold channel this time. And the market broke sideways and then down. A tight channel. A fairly tight channel here. And the market tested it and broke to the downside. So these are all breakouts. Other times, the market hits the line. It reverses. It breaks through the line. It reverses. It breaks through the bottom of the line. It reverses. Breaks above the top of the line. It reverses. It breaks below the bottom of the line. It reverses. So you can either get a breakout beyond the line or a reversal. In both cases, there's a possible trade. Traders are mostly looking for reversals when they draw lines. We reverse down here. And we reverse down here. So I could draw a line using these two highs. But then we broke above it. Broke above the line. And we reverse down again. So I could draw a new line using this as point one. And this is point two. Once the line is sloping down, it's a bear trend line. Therefore it's a reasonable possibility for a top of a bear channel. Bulls see the bear channel and they hope that the bear channel is a bull flag. Looking for two legs down. One pull back two. And bulls are hoping this bear breakout fails and is followed by trend resumption up. So bull trend, pull back, and then resumption of the trend. Bears are hoping bull trend, double top, and the start of a bear trend. A bear channel. I always think of it as a bull flag. The odds are it's going to get a bull breakout at some point. And we have a reversal up and another reversal up. Possibly a high two buy setup. High one. And then second leg down. Possibly high two. Right now this little bull doji does not look like it's enough to reverse these two big bear bars. But it might be. It's around a 50% pullback of this bull trend. And a lot of times the bulls come back at around 50%. We have a bear breakout below a trading range. Yet the follow through bar has a bull body. That's bad follow through. And it increases the chances that if we go down any further, this more likely is a bear leg in a trading range and less likely the start of a bear trend. If the bear breakout was followed by a second or third consecutive bear bar, it would increase the chances that this sell off is the start of a bear trend. But this bad follow through makes it more likely that this bear trend is really simply going to be a leg in a trading range or a bull flag. Remember, we're still above the bottom of the initial very strong rally. And we're about 50% down. Maybe a little bit more. So the odds still favor the bulls. It's more likely that this will be a bull flag. Remember every bear channel is a bull flag. At least in my mind, I think of every bear channel as probably having a bull breakout. So every bear channel I think is a bull flag. And every bull channel I think of as a bear flag because 75% of the time there will be a break below the bull trend line. Now if there is a channel here, a bear channel, bulls are looking to buy a reversal up. We need two points to draw a line. We have one and maybe two. So far we only have one for sure, but if we start to go up here, then this becomes two. Before it turns up, we still have a second line. We have an obvious trend line above. We have a trend line above. Traders can create a parallel and then drag it down here to the low point in between. And that would create a channel. This might already be breaking below the bottom of the channel and reversing up. So we have this bear trend line. Create a parallel. Drag it to the low point in between and you have a channel. And this could be an overshoot of the bear channel that is reversing up. At around a 50% pullback and a bull trend. The odds still favor the bulls at this point. The bears have not done enough to make traders think that the bears have taken control. Traders want to see what will happen here. Will the bear trend continue down and become a bear trend? Or is this the end of the selling and the resumption of the bull trend? The line is important. Traders want to see what happens. And so far it looks like the market is stalling at the line. The bull trend is a big high 2 bull flag. Possibly a big high 2 bull flag. Two legs down. One pullback two. So if we get a reversal up here, that would be a high 2 bull flag. This would simply be an overshoot. A failed breakout below the bottom of the channel. Bulls look to buy a reversal up at the bottom of this channel. Therefore, they will place a buy stop to buy just above the high of this bar. Because that would be a reversal up from the bottom of the channel. And they hope that will get some kind of a second leg up. Maybe leg 1, pullback leg 2. Maybe simply a test of the top of this cell climax. Maybe a test of this high. Maybe a test of that high. In any case, there's enough room up there for at least a scout. And bulls will buy above the high of this bar. This bar did not go above the high of that bar. We went lower. But now look what happened. We have a second buy signal. A second attempt to reverse up. The second failed break up below the channel. We broke below the channel. Tried to reverse up. Broke below the channel again. Trying to reverse up again. This is a micro double bottom. Down and up. Down and now up again. So bulls will buy above the high of this bar. This is a higher probability buy than simply buying above this bar. This micro double bottom means that the bears twice failed to break below the channel. And that increases the probability that the reversal up will be profitable. Bulls will therefore place a buy stop just above the high of this bar. And they'll get long here. It's a good looking buy signal bar. A micro double bottom. In the bottom of a channel. And a pullback in a bull trend. The math is good. The probability is good that bulls will make money buying right there. And they did. No reason to get out here. No reason to get out here. It looks like we're in the process of a swing up. Maybe leg one pullback. Leg two. Maybe we'll go up here somewhere. Lines have to make sense. They have to look good. And if they don't, computers will ignore them. Initially you draw a line with this low, that low. Once the market goes below the line and starts to reverse up, you use this low and that low. Will computers be using this high and that high? They will, maybe initially, until they start to see that using these two bars for a trend line below, make this expanding. And this is probably too high for the market ever to reach there. If the lines are too divergent, most computers will ignore that higher line thinking that the market will never get there. Here we have a strong bull breakout, a pullback, probably a spike in channel up. And we did have that here. We got two legs sideways rather than down. Now we have another breakout. A line like this that is not close to parallel to an obvious line, probably not going to be useful. The market's probably not going to reach it. It's better just to ignore it. In general, lines that are closer to parallel or very parallel are much more reliable. Obvious reversal up here, reversal up here, obvious line, create a parallel, drag it to the high point in between, and then see what the market does when it gets up to that line. And you can see a lot of computers did exactly that. They used this parallel line and created a parallel channel. And a lot of traders see it as resistance. Bulls are taking profits and bears might be starting to sell up there. The closer the lines are to parallel, the more computers will use them and the more likely they will create support and resistance. Resistance at the top of the channel. The market repeatedly is trying to break above it and failing. Again, you need two points to draw a line. And here we have possible two points. One and then two or two. And then maybe this is two. So maybe this one and two. And then maybe this is bar three, the third point. Now, if there are a lot of bars between one and two, and very few bars to bar three, traders will not view this as three points. One, two, three. Or one, two, three, four. They'll view this as, this whole thing as point two. So one and two. So one and two. There has to be pretty good symmetry. The distance between point one and two has to be similar to the distance between point two and three. And if not, traders will ignore the line. Or they'll count it differently from how you're counting it. Here we have just a few bars and we have maybe five times more bars between one and two. So computers will not be looking at this as point one, point two, point three. They'll simply look at it as point one, point two, and maybe that as point three. So we'll see that there's a number of bars between point two and three. 32 bars between point one and two. 32 bars between point one and two. Only three bars between two and three. This is not a one, two, three. This is a one and a two. And they'll look at this collection of bars as simply point two and choose any one of them as the point two bar. So point one, point two or point two, and then point three. There's still not all that good symmetry. Too many bars between one and two or two compared to between two and three. But at least it's not as bad as this as two and three. So more computers will pay attention to this and they'll want to see what the market does at that third point. So we have a reversal down and a reversal down. So I can draw a line one and two. And that line is probably acceptable through here. But once you start doing this and this, this is too small of a pattern to influence the market after a breakout like this. So you can say point one, point two, point three. No. Computers are totally ignoring that after this takes place. Very little distance between point one and two. And point three at this point, this is point three and the market is nowhere near it. Do I keep looking out here for point three? No. There'll be too many bars between two and three compared to the number of bars between one and two. So that is not an important line. Computers are not going to be looking at what takes place out here at that line. No one's going to use that line to place trades. There'll be many other more important lines. For example, connecting this high and this high or this high. This becomes a much more important channel. Only seven bars between one and two. And at this point, there are 40 bars between two and three. And there's not even a point three yet. Bad symmetry. Too many bars between two and three compared to between one and two. And there's not even a point three at this point. So you may have to go out a hundred bars, two hundred bars before the market gets to that line. And at that point, computers will not be looking at that line. There'll be many other lines that are more important. Two points to draw a line. One, two, three. I don't think so. Once you get strong breakouts like this, these reversals become minor. And computers pay attention to major highs. A high that's followed by a strong bear breakout. This is a major high. So this is the point that the computers will use. A reversal down, very strong bear breakout to a new low. A major high. A major high. Fairly major high. Computers will use that point and this point. And they'll say, okay. We broke to the upside. But the bear trend resumed within five bars, which happens 75% of the time. They draw this line to see what happens in the general area of the line. And then they look to sell a reversal down, expecting a resumption of the bear trend. That line gives traders a location where they can start to look to sell. Strong bear reversal here. At some point traders redraw the line, maybe somewhere in here, they start wondering if this is the start of a new leg down. So they'll start to ignore this line and then start to use this line and they'll watch to see what the market does when it gets near it. Traders like to use major highs and major lows for lines. This is a fairly major high. It's a higher low here, but it's still a strong bull breakout and a pullback lasting a lot of bars. Same with here. And you can see lots of major highs and lots of major lows. Reversal up in a bull trend. 0.1, 0.2, strong reversal up. Found support here, but broke below the line here. Traders will ignore that line and then draw a new line. Initially, traders might draw a parallel of the first line. And then see how the market responds. So they got a bull trend line, create a parallel and see what the market does. They have a bear trend line, create a parallel, see what the market does. A bull channel line, create a parallel and see what the market does. A bull channel line, create a parallel and see what the market does. A bull channel line, create a parallel and see what the market does. As soon as you have two points, you can draw a line and you immediately know that the market's in a channel. Whether or not you're aware of what the top of the channel is, you know that you can draw a line here, a bull trend line. Therefore, it's a bull channel. There's some line on top that traders will see as resistance. And when the market comes down to the line, traders will look to buy a reversal up here or a second entry here. They'll also look to take profits on a reversal down at the top of the channel. If the channel is broad enough, some traders will even short on the reversal down from the top of the channel. Or at a prior high. For example, at this high, bear sold and made money. Even at this high, they sold, maybe sold more up here. Bear's pullback fell below that breakout point. So the market's in a stairs pattern and bears will sell new highs and scale in higher, betting that they'll make money. They make a profit on their second entry and they get out break even on their first. You have a reversal down. You can draw a line. The initial line was probably here. Maybe traders looking for a wedge, one, two, three, but it broke strongly above it. Reversed down again. So now we have the ability to draw another line. And traders like to see what happens at the top of the channel. Will it reverse down? And they also like to see what happens at prior highs. Will it reverse down? Will limit order bears make money? Will bears selling at this high, scaling in higher, make money? Those are limit order bears. Limit order bears here made money. They sold with the limit order at this high and it went down far enough for a scalp. That increases the chances that the bull channel will soon evolve into a trading range. I talked several times about the 70% rule. I'm going to talk a little bit more about it here. As I said, you can call it a 70% rule, maybe 75% rule. But the general idea is that if you have a bull trend and you get a breakout above the top of the trend, 70% chance that you'll get a reversal down within 5 bars. If you get a breakout below the bottom of the channel, 70% chance you'll get a reversal up within about 5 bars. And you have a 30% chance that the bull breakout will be successful and start a new market cycle, breakout and channel and then trading range. Because there's a 70% chance that the market will reverse down to the bottom of the channel, traders will look to sell below bars at the top of the channel, looking for at least a scalp down to the bottom of the channel, assuming there's room here for a scalp. If there's not enough room for a minimum scalp, traders should not take that short. Instead, they should only look to buy reversals up at the bottom of the channel. A bull trend, easier to make money looking to buy at the bottom of the channel than to sell at the top of the channel. A good way to buy, place a stop just above the high of a bull bar at the bottom of the channel, looking for a resumption of the trend up, a continuation of the channel. I think this is pretty interesting. Look at this chart. It's the same as this chart, but the time frame is different. This is a 1 minute chart, and this is a bull breakout above the top of a bull channel. Now what about my 70% rule? 70% chance the breakout fails within about 5 bars and goes down to the bottom of the channel. Well, there's an additional point about that 70% rule. The 70% rule works on the highest time frame where you can draw the channel. And is this 1 minute chart the highest time frame where I can see this channel? No. In fact, this channel rallied for 200 bars before it reversed down. And my rule is 70% chance it reverses down within 5 bars, but on the highest time frame chart that shows the channel. Here's a 30 minute chart of this 1 minute chart. And here's the same bull breakout that we have right here. This went up for 200 bars, and this went up for 5 or 6 bars. And 70% chance you reverse down within 5 bars. Well, here's 6 bars, and it started to reverse down here. And reversal down, in general, if you get a reversal, traders expect 10 bars, 2 legs. Here we have 1 leg. It's about 10 bars, but it's only 1 leg. So probably traders will sell the first rally, and there'll be a second leg sideways to down. I can draw the channel this way. And there's still many bars here, maybe 100 or more bars above the top of the channel before the reversal took place. But if I draw it this way, using these two points, create a parallel, anchor it here. The market's reversing down within two bars. Minimum goal, attest to the bottom of the channel. Some computers will use the green line, other computers will change their minds and then use this orange line for the channel. And they'll look to sell a reversal down, if the reversal comes within about 5 bars. This is consistent with my 70% rule. I look at the highest timeframe chart where I can draw the channel, and I expect the reversal down to come within 5 bars of the bull breakout above the channel on that timeframe. This is not the highest timeframe that shows the channel. Obviously, this is a 1 minute chart. I can draw the same channels on the 30 minute chart. This is the highest timeframe. So I'm looking for a reversal within 5 bars here, not within 5 bars here. I talked earlier how traders like to see parallel lines, but lots of channels do not have parallel lines. Here we have a small double top, maybe triple top, and a small double bottom. Parallel lines. It's a channel. It's a trading range, but it's a channel. We got a bull breakout. The lines can also converge instead of being parallel. They can get closer together. For example, we have a lower high, and we have a higher low. This is a channel with convergent lines. It's a triangle. As soon as you have 3 pushes up or 3 pushes down, and the lines are convergent, you have a triangle. So, 1 high, 2 high, 3 highs. That's all I need to conclude that it's a triangle. And here we have a bull breakout. A triangle is a type of channel where the lines get closer together. They converge. Lines can also diverge. So we have a higher high, a lower low, and we tried to get another lower low. We reversed up several times. This is also a channel. It's a horizontal channel where the lines are divergent. It's a type of expanding triangle. Anytime you can draw two lines on the chart and they contain the price action, you have a channel. Whether the lines are parallel, get closer together, convergent. Get further apart, divergent. Traders will still watch to see how the market reacts near the lines. In this video, I talked about channels having two lines. And I said that to draw one line, you need two points. And then I moved on and talked about the 70% rule. That if you get a breakout above or below a channel, 70% of the time, the breakout will reverse and go to the opposite side of the channel within about five bars. However, that rule only applies to the highest timeframe that shows the channel. So if a channel is present on the one minute chart and the breakout goes 20, 30 or 100 bars beyond the line before reversing, look at a different chart. A five minute chart, a 15 minute chart, 60 minute chart to see if the same channel is there. If so, look at the highest timeframe chart that has that channel and then look for a reversal within about five bars. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks training course. This is the first of six videos on channels. one And