 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading major trend reversal tops. Some traders do not like taking trades where the probability of success is only about 40%. And therefore, they do not take the early entry in a major trend reversal. They wait until after there is a strong breakout, because at that point, the probability of making money is higher. We have a bull trend and we have a series of bear bars breaking below a bull trend line. And now we're forming a lower high. Some traders will take that short, taking a chance that it's the start of a major trend reversal down. However, the probability of a swing down at this point is not all that great. We've been sideways for about 30 bars and we're in a tight trading range here. For the bears who do take that short, they'll look at this and say, okay, seven bear bars, several good closes on the lows. I'll short and put a stop above this high and take a chance that we get a swing down. That is a reasonable thing to do, but only about a 40% chance of success. Some traders do not like to win only 40% of the time and they prefer higher probability trades. And they instead would wait and not take this short. An eight bar tight trading range inside of a 20 or 30 bar trading range. Minor reversal likely. It's more likely that we'll just stay sideways, but 40% chance we'll get a swing down. If traders put a stop up here. And that turned out to be the case. This is the 40% of the time when the market had a swing down. If a trader wants a higher probability short, instead of shorting here in the middle of this trading range, in this tight trading range, he'll wait for a strong bear break up below here. For example, we have a bear bar, consecutive good size bear bars. And then we're getting another pair of bear bars here. At this point, we've had five, six or seven consecutive bear bars. It's higher probability to short either here or down here. After a trader sees this, he knows that the first reversal up probably will be minor. And he could look to sell below here. It's a wedge. We went up, we went down. We went up, we went down, we went up. We went down, we went up. So there's a wedge bear flag at the moving average. After seven consecutive bear bars, probably going down at least a little bit lower. And therefore, this is a relatively high probability short for at least a small move down. Now we have consecutive very big bear trend bars. And we have a follow through bar and another follow through bar. This has a high probability of leading to at least a small second leg down. So this is a high probability short. It's a bear break below what the bulls hoped was a high two bull flag. Strong bull trend. First leg down, pull back, second leg down. So they're hoping for a double bottom, high or low and a rally. Instead, we got a breakout and not just a breakout, but a strong bear breakout, a pair of very big bear bars and follow through bear bars. Therefore, traders will be thinking about a possible measured move down. The bulls were hoping for a double bottom and a breakout above this neckline and a measured move up. Instead, we're getting the bear breakout. Bears will be thinking this is possibly a measuring gap or a measured move down. So instead of a measured move up from the double bottom, the bears are looking for a measured move down from the double bottom. Here's the double bottom attempt, the bear breakout. Here's the neckline of the double bottom. The bulls want a measured move up. Because we're getting the breakout, the bears want the measured move down from the top to the potential double bottom and then down here. And you can see where the market ended up almost exactly through a measured move down. For swing traders, this reversal is probably the earliest swing short. Maybe you could sell up here, possible final flag early in the day, hoping that you're getting an early high of the day. But later entries here, here, or here often have higher probability. In any case, with any trade, the math is always reasonable if you hold for at least two times your actual risk. However, many trades have potential of much bigger profit and it's usually better not to go for the minimum. Traders looking at this are saying, do I sell here? It's a low two. Do I sell here? Do I sell here? Do I sell here? Where's the best entry? There is no best entry. And every entry is a trade-off between risk reward and probability. The earlier entries tend to have a closer stop, so the risk is less. There's more profit potential, so the reward is greater. So the earlier entries tend to have a much better risk reward. However, they also tend to have lower probability. The later entries have a much higher probability of success, but the stop is usually further away. And there's less profit remaining in the trade. Both are mathematically acceptable trades. It usually comes down to personality. A lot of traders will add to a winning trade. There's no reason to get out here. Maybe you can get out here, but if you do, you got to look to sell again. Strong enough up, a lot of bears will not take the first reversal down. However, they will take the second reversal down, even though it's a bull bar. It's a low two short at the moving average. This is not enough for a major reversal, and therefore it's a double top bear flag. It's a reasonable short. And bears who sold here, if they did not get out here, they might sell more here or here. If they did get out here, we're still always in short. The bulls have not done enough to make it always in long. They have to get short again if they're trading always in. And a double top bear flag, a low two at the moving average is a reasonable time to get short again. If a bear took any of these shorts, let's say you took an early one and you sold more here or here or here or here, he's scaling into a winning trade. He's scaling into a trade where he already has a profit. The minimum goal for any trade is a profit that is at least twice your actual risk. You don't know what your actual risk is when you put the trade on. But once the trade goes your way, you then know what the actual risk is. For example, had you sold below the low of this bar and then you see this bear breakout, you discovered that your actual risk was to just above the high of this bear bar. So your actual risk was the height of this brown box. Here's one times your actual risk. Here's two times your actual risk. Mathematically, it's acceptable to take your entire profit right here at two times your actual risk. That is the minimum acceptable profit to get a positive trader's equation. But like everything in life, doing the minimum is rarely doing the best. Again, if you sold below this bar, the market broke strongly to the downside here. At that point, you discovered that your actual risk was only from just below this low to one tick above this high. You had a very small actual risk. And therefore, this is two times actual risk right here. And if you exited your entire position right there and you did that on 100 trades, you have a very high probability of making money. But again, exiting with the minimum is rarely the most profitable strategy. Same thing here. If you sold below the low of this bar, your actual risk is to just above the high of this bar. You discovered that after this bear breakout. And two times your actual risk is right there at that bear close. It's reasonable to exit there, but it's probably not ideal. When the actual risk is tiny, like here, here, and here, exiting at two times actual risk is usually not a good strategy. You have much more profit potential, and it's usually better to hold for a bigger profit. Same thing here. Actual risk, you sell below that bar, you get filled here. The market breaks to the downside. You now know your actual risk was only from your entry price right here to one tick above this bear bar here. Two times actual risk here. Some traders have a scalper's mentality, and they keep taking quick profits, two times actual risk, and then sell again. Very difficult to do because what you'll find is you don't take all of the entries, and therefore you will not make nearly as much money as a swing trader. I talk more about this in the video on trade management and taking profits. A lot of traders do not pay attention to actual risk, especially if it's small, and they set their target at two times initial risk. Initial risk is based upon their initial stop. For example, had you sold below this bar and put a stop just above its high, your initial risk was one tick below this bar to one tick above that bar, and this is two times initial risk. Same here. Sell below this bar, stop above its high, that's your initial risk, here's two times initial risk. It's always at least as big as actual risk, and it's usually bigger than actual risk. And that is usually a better strategy, so it's always good to take profits at two times initial risk. However, it's not always best, and if the initial risk is small, and you have the potential for a very big profit, it's usually better to not exit at two times initial risk. It's reasonable to take half off or part of your profits at two times initial risk. However, if the potential for profit is much greater, a lot of traders will continue to hold their entire position until they believe their premise is no longer valid. If their premise is that the market's in a strong bear trend, they'll continue to hold short until they think it's no longer in a strong bear trend. Had you sold here and had not taken any profits along the way, here, a pretty good bull reversal bar, a double bottom, a second failed breakout below the bottom of yesterday, it's reasonable to take partial or full profits here. But if you do, the market did not get always in long here or here. You have to be thinking about selling again below the low two at the moving average. Initial risk for the bears who sold below this bar, their stop is probably here. And this is two times initial risk. It did not get down to their initial risk by the end of the day. And if that was their goal, they would exit at the end of the day. Again, it's reasonable to hold your position until either the end of the session or until there's a reasonably good buy signal. The market keeps trying to reverse. Every trend is constantly reversing. On the way up, the market tried to reverse repeatedly. On the way down, it's trying to reverse repeatedly. But when the market's in a fairly tight channel like this, 80% of the attempts to reverse up will fail and become bear flags. And the trend will continue. Every time there's a strong breakout to a new low, traders will tighten their stops. Because here, you've got a strong breakout to a new low. Therefore, this high is important. It's major. And as long as the rally up stays below the major lower high, the premise of a strong bear trend is still intact. And therefore, once you have a strong breakout to a new low, traders will tighten their stops to above that high. If it gets above that high, then the premise of a strong bear trend is no longer valid. The market's then either in a trading range or in a bull trend. And if you're holding on the belief that the market's in a bear trend, then it should not get above this high. And therefore, it's reasonable to put your stop there. Strong bear breakout. Reasonable to lower your stop to here. This then becomes a major lower high. After this close, it's a strong breakout to a new low in a bear trend. If the bear trend is going to continue, it should not get above this high. And therefore, you can lower your stop from here to here. Strong bear breakout to a new low. If it's in a bear trend, it should not get above that high. And therefore, you could lower your stop from here to here. And that does not matter whether you short it here or short it here or short it here. Your stop location has nothing to do with your entry. Your stop location has to do with what the market is doing at the moment. Another strong breakout, new low. This is therefore a major lower high. And if it's in a bear trend, it should not get above this high. And therefore, if you're holding short on the belief that it's in a bear trend, it's reasonable to tighten your stop, to trail your stop down to above the most recent major lower high. And you keep doing that until either the end of the session or until there's a reasonable buy signal, and then you get up. The premise is that it's in a bear trend, and therefore, it should be forming lower highs. And if it stops forming lower highs, then it's no longer in a bear trend. Is this a major lower high? We have a strong bear breakout, but only one bar did not get to a new low. Therefore, this is not a major lower high. And therefore, traders should not lower their stop from here to here. And you can see this high looks like it's a little bit above that high. And most bears would hold short. If they did not get out here, they're not going to get out here. They'll rely on their stop up here. When the market's in a bear trend, it sometimes has pretty strong looking reversals. We have a bull bar here and an even better second attempt to reverse up here. However, the channel is tight. The entire trend is tight. As long as it's not going above a major lower high, this is probably going to be a bear flag or a trading range. We got a strong enough reversal up so that we'll probably get at least a small second leg up. But unless we get above this high, this is just going to be a double top bear flag. Or you can call it a triangle. We went down. We went down. We went down. You can call it a wedge. We went up. We went up. We went up. Even though it's not a wedge shape. In any case, it's much more likely a bear flag that will lead to a resumption of the bear trend than a reversal. It's too small a pattern to be a major reversal. And therefore, it's probably a minor reversal, which means a bear flag. If a trader exited, he would sell again here. If he did not exit, he might add to his position here. Double top bear flag at the moving average. When you took this trade, if you took this, you knew you only had a 40% chance of a swing down. 60% chance that we'd either go sideways or possibly resume back up. But your risk is relatively small compared to your potential reward. Most successful swing trades end up as trading majors. Sometimes after a small swing profit. Sometimes after a big swing profit. This is a bear channel. A bear channel is a bull flag. 75% chance we're going to get a bull breakout. And this entire bear channel will evolve into a trading range. Maybe the top of the range will be here. The most recent, really major lower high. Might retrace the entire trend. Here's a 60 minute chart showing what took place over the next three days. This brown box is this brown box. This is the five minute chart. This is the 60 minute chart of this same five minute chart. And you can see that even though it was a strong bear trend. The next day it reversed up and it reversed up for several more days. And therefore, even though it was a successful major trend reversal down. It ended up reversing into a larger trading range. And in fact, it went above the top of the bear trend. Two days later, it was back above this high. Therefore, when you see a major trend reversal on the five minute chart, don't assume that it's going to lead to a trend down for the next five days or 10 days. It's probably going to evolve into a trading range within a day or two. However, it's still a very good profit for a day trader looking for a swing trade down. What do you do here? We have a bull trend and then a higher high major trend reversal. But we're at the end of the trading day. It's a higher high major trend reversal. It's an okay swing trade. But one problem you have is there might not be enough time for a swing. It could just go sideways, but it's a reasonable short. You got a bull trend and a high two bull flag, a double bottom bull flag at the moving average. But it's late in the trend and it's near the end of the session. It might be the final bull flag. That means that if we get a new high, it could be the end of the trend. We can get a reversal back down into the final flag and either a trading range or a sell the close finish at the end of the day. We have gap bars, although you might not be able to see it. There's a gap between the high of this bar and the moving average and then again here. When you get moving average gap bars late in a trend, they usually lead to a major trend reversal attempt around the prior high. And therefore, that's another reason to be looking to sell here. MAG, Moving Average Gap Bars. If you take this short, you really need signs of strength because you're right at the end of the day and you really don't have that much time. Most of the bears will get out, especially above a second bull bar here. First bull bar, second bull bar. They'll get out above here. And look what happened. This high went exactly to the top of that bull bar, but not above. What does that tell you? It tells you that the bears were able to prevent the market from getting above this bull bar. They know that a lot of the bears would exit there and they know the bulls were trying to get it above there. But it got there and turned down. That's a good sign for the bears. They were able to stop the bulls from forcing the bears out. And that means we're probably going lower. And now we have a 5, 6, 7 bar bear micro channel and it became a sell the close finish. Here at the end of the day, if the market's not going your way, you have to get out quickly. For example, we have two legs down, one pull back two and a bull body. Even though it has a big tail on top, most bears would get out above that bull bar because there's just not much time in the day. And if it starts to go up for a few bars, you'll run out of time before it can go back down. My general rule is if it goes one tick above a bull bar, I get out. If it goes four ticks above any bar, a small bull bar or a bear bar, I'll get out at the end of the day. And bears will take profits at the end of the day, the final seconds, the final minute or two. Very strong bull trend. A higher high major trend reversal. We broke above the bull trend and we went up, bad follow through, and we're reversing down. We have a bear bar. It's a reasonable short looking for a swing down. You have a bi-climax, the strongest bull breakout very late in the bull trend. Probably an exhaustion bar. Exhaustion does not mean reversal to an opposite trend. It simply means usually a pause in the bull trend, but it can lead to a reversal and therefore it's reasonable to short below that bear bar. Small two bar final flag. If you take that short, what do you do when you see this bar? You're saying, oh, that's a double bottom and it could be a double bottom bull flag. This whole thing could be a big bull flag, a pullback from this very strong small pullback bull trend. And you have an exceptionally strong bi-signal bar. If you take this short, you have to get out above that bull bar because the bulls have a reasonable argument for this being a double bottom bull flag. It could not fall below the bottom of this strong reversal up. Therefore, this is a major higher low and the bulls got down to it, but not below it. And now it's resuming up with a very strong bull bar. Sometimes you take a short and it's reasonable to take the short. But if you get a reasonable buy signal after you take your short, you have to get out. And that's what took place here. It's hard to reverse. If you took that short, it's hard to reverse to long here. But you have to get out of the short. And if you did not take the short, it's reasonable to buy here. If you did get out of your short here, you can wait for two or three bars and then buy, maybe buy this close. Or buy above this bar, a wedge bull flag to the moving average. Down, up, down, up, down, and then a bull bar closing on its high. Most traders do not like to reverse, even really experienced traders. I've been trading for 30 years and I don't reverse all that much. I prefer if I took that short, I would get out here and then wait one or two bars and then look to buy if I wanted to buy. In this video, I talked about how a lot of traders don't like the initial entries for major trend reversals because the probability is usually only 40%. While a 40% probability is still good if you have a reward several times greater than your risk, some traders prefer to wait until the probability is higher. In other words, they wait for a strong breakout and then they enter. Both approaches are reasonable. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading major trend reversal tops. Another Sn opt-out is to each Piscesl. Sometimes I terfores einzelter. A big part of this is that mới is the third ticker. First youuler selection it will be presadsing into all parameters in the middle. Fears based on all the coordinates, making sure you change your circumstances and what we are all around the 1080TOPs.