 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the seventh of seven videos on breakouts. I'm going to begin by talking about five tick traps and 11 pip traps where the market goes almost far enough for a scalp and then reverses. Finally, I'll talk about fading weak setups. E-mini traders, the scalpers, they often take profits at one point or two points profit or three points profit, four points profit. One point is four ticks. Four points profit is 16 ticks. That means that any move that is four ticks, eight ticks, 12 ticks, or 16 ticks creates support and resistance. For example, if a bull buys above the high of this bar, looking for a scalp, a one point scalp, he buys one tick above. If a bull is trying to make a two point profit, the market usually has to go ten ticks. If he wants a three point profit, he usually has to go 14 ticks. If he's expecting a four point profit, the market has to go 18 ticks. And that means 18 ticks above a reasonable buy signal bar. There is resistance. Bulls will be selling there to take profits. So if he's expecting a four point profit, the market has to go 18 ticks. And that means 18 ticks above a reasonable buy signal bar. And that means 18 ticks above a reasonable buy signal bar. There is resistance. Bulls will be selling there to take profits. If the market goes one tick less than these targets and starts to reverse, then those scalpers are trapped. So for example, if it goes five ticks instead of six ticks and starts to reverse, the bulls were unable to get their one point profit. And now they're trapped. And a lot of them will start to sell. Let's say a bull buys on a stop one tick above this bar, betting on a failed bear breakout, a decent bull bar. Here the market rallied ten ticks above that entry price. So a bull looking for a two point profit was able to scalp out at eight ticks. He buys one tick above the bar. It has to go nine ticks above his entry price to make an eight tick profit and went ten ticks. This is not a trap. The bull successfully made two points on their scalp. On the other hand, let's say a bull looked at this and said, we have a wedge bottom. One, two, three or one, two, three. A spike in channel bottom. We're probably going to get a swing up maybe to the top of the bear channel. So the bull buys one tick above the high of this buy signal bar looking for a swing up, a swing up four points. It has to go 18 ticks above the high of this bar for him to make his money. He buys one tick above right here. It has to go 16 ticks higher for his four points. And for his limit order to get filled, it has to go one tick above that. It has to go up 18 ticks above the high of the signal bar. If it goes up 17 ticks, it hits his limit order to make four points profit. Most of those traders would not get their profit. Their order would not be filled. And then when they see this, they have to be thinking, uh-oh, it hit my limit order, did not fill me. And now we have a bear bar. So maybe I'm trapped. Maybe this is a 17 tick trap. A lot of times, traders will look at a chart like this and say, well, it's a possible four point swing, but maybe it won't hit four points. I'll place my limit order one tick lower. So they'll try to get out with three and three quarters points profit. In other words, they'll try to exit with 15 ticks. And that is part of the reason why you get the 17 tick trap. Traders looking at this saying, well, maybe it won't quite make four points. I'll place a limit order one tick lower. And that's part of the reason why the market will go to the 17 ticks and reverse down. You'll have some bulls exiting with one tick smaller profit. Bear scalpers, when they see the market hit a target for the bulls, they'll sell the reversal down, betting that the bulls will be exiting. Here you have bears selling, betting on the lower high, two legs up, one pull back, two. They'll sell below that bar or below this bar. Here you'll have bears selling, betting that the bear channel will continue. So they'll sell just below the low of this bar, one tick below the low of that bear bar. And look what happened here. Bear sold one tick below this bar, betting that they'll make at least a scalp. It fell five ticks and then did this, reversed up. So the bears who sold just below that bar, they get filled over here, are now trapped. And they'll buy back their shorts. And part of this reversal up is the trapped bears. It had to fall six ticks for them to make one point. It fell five ticks and hit their buy limit order where they wanted to take profits, did not fill most of them. And as it started to go up, they panicked and they bought. So we have a five tick trap and reversal. You have some bears who sold below this bar. They get filled here, one tick below that low. Maybe hoping for a two point trade or a three point trade. Here, the market fell 13 ticks. Those bears who were hoping for three points needed it to fall 14 ticks to make three points profit. They sell one tick below the bar and then it has to fall 12 ticks to hit their target. It has to go one more tick, total of 14 ticks to make three points. And instead it fell exactly 13 ticks and reversed up. So it's a 13 tick trap. It's actually kind of a dumb thing to place a buy limit order at that price in this particular case because it has to fall below this low. And I think that's not a high probability bet. If I were taking this for a three point trade, I would try to get out one tick above three points. So I'd get out one tick above this low just in case we get a perfect double bottom, which we did. As I said, sometimes traders who are not entirely confident that the move will fill their profit target will go for one tick less. Bulls hoping for four points. Look at this. It's not all that good. Maybe instead of trying for a limit order 16 ticks above my entry, I'll place it 15 ticks. Same with here. Fairs selling here thinking it has to fall below this to get 14 ticks for them to make 12. They'll place the limit order to get out one tick early. Here, I would not take that short. And I certainly would not place my limit order looking for a three tick profit. For me, the minimum scalp in the E-mini is one point. So I'm never going to be going to a trade planning to get out with three ticks instead of four ticks. Think about it from the perspective of traders looking for trades in the opposite direction. For example, here, bulls will think, okay, a lot of the bears know this is probably not going to fall very far. And a lot of the bears will probably be scalping for one point. It has to fall six ticks. So maybe I'll place a limit order to buy four ticks below just in case it's a five tick trap, then I'll get filled. And the opposite is true here. A lot of bears will look at this and say, yeah, it's a strong rally, but it's probably not going to go above this high. Maybe it'll stay another lower high. And they know a lot of bulls will look to take profits at four points. So they know a lot of bulls have limit orders 17 ticks above this high. They'll have bears placing limit orders to go short, at least for a scalp, 17 ticks above this high. And they also know that this might be a 17 tick trap. So they'll place limit orders 16 ticks above this high. You have bulls and bears selling at 16 ticks above this high. And sometimes you'll get a reversal. A lot of times you'll just get a pullback far enough down for the bears to make a scalp. As I said, the bulls who bought above here for a two point scalp needed the market to go up 10 ticks to make their eight ticks. And they got filled. They made their money. The bears know bulls will take profits there, especially since it's slightly lower than this high. And the bears will short exactly where the bulls are trying to get out. Opposite E-mini traders, the scalpers, are betting that the stop entry traders will not make their one, two, three or four points. So they enter in the opposite direction with limit orders, maybe a tick or two below the target for the bulls. Bears know the target for the bulls is nine ticks above this. They know it has to go up 10 ticks. So bears will place limit orders to sell one or two ticks below that. The bears down here know the bulls might be trying for three points. The bears needed to fall 14 ticks to make three points. The bulls know that. And the bulls also see a potential double bottom. So the bulls will place limit orders to buy 12 or 13 ticks below that low trying to trap the bears. The same here. The bulls know this is a bad looking short. They know some bears will sell it, maybe only for a one point scalp. The bulls know it has to fall six ticks for those bears to make money. So the bulls will place limit orders to buy four or five ticks below that low. Betting that the bears will be buying down there as well. The bears are buying and the bulls are buying. The bulls probably will make money. The bears here, they might sell four ticks above this bar and scale in higher. Betting that it's a bad buy and the bulls will be only scalping. In other words, the bulls do not have a lot of conviction and will not be holding for swing trades and will not be buying much higher. So they will not continue to buy. Bears will start selling either at this high, one point higher, two points higher, or maybe they'll start selling at one point higher or two points higher. And the same true here. The bears will assume it probably will have profit taking around four points above this high. And that the market will convert into a trading range. So bears will sell. They might start selling one point above two points, three points. I would not. The context is good for some kind of a swing up and the conversion into a trading range. If I'm going to be selling at bull profit targets, I probably would start selling at three points or four points up. 16 or 17 ticks above the high of the buy signal bar. Bulls buy with limit orders. 4, 8, 12, 16 ticks below sell signal bars, betting that the bears will take profits there. And the bulls are buying for a scalp, betting on a trading range. If there's a weak buy setup, bear scalpers will sell at the high of the buy signal bar. And they'll scale in one or two points higher, just below the profit targets for the stop order bulls. Strong bear breakout, trying to get a bull reversal. As I said, some bears will start selling here, sell more one point higher, sell more two points higher. It comes down to their original engine price. They exit break even on their first order. A profit on this and two points profit on that. Here we have a bear inside bar at the bottom of a weak channel. And it's possibly a wedge channel after a bear breakout. So it's possibly a spike in channel bear trend. The bear sell signal bar has a fairly prominent tail. A lot of bulls will bet it's a bad bear flag. They'll place a limit order to buy at the low of that bar. And they'll buy more four ticks lower. They'll exit break even when the market gets back to their first entry. And then with a one point profit here. Some will hold in case we get a continued rally. Whenever you have trapped scalpers, other scalpers will do the opposite. You have bulls and bears buying at the same time down here. You have bulls and bears selling at the same time up here. That means profit targets create support and resistance. Profit targets for the bulls creates resistance. Because both bulls and bears will sell at those profit targets. Profit targets for the bears create support. Because both bulls and bears will be buying at that profit target. Forex scalpers often take profits at 10 pips, 20 pips, 30 pips, 50 pips. And if they enter on a stop, to make 10 pips, the market has to go 12 pips. To make 50 pips, it has to go 52 pips. If the market moves one pip less, then it traps traders. For example, let's say you have a bull scalper who looks at this and they see a pullback. Maybe testing this high. Maybe this is a measuring gap. We'll get a measure move up. Maybe they'll place an order to buy one pip above the high of this buy signal bar. Expecting the market to go up high enough for them to make a 10 pip scalp. If they buy one pip above this bar and they need 10 pips for profit, that's 11 pips, it usually has to go one more pip before their profit taking limit order gets filled. So that means traders buying on a stop above the high of this bar usually need a rally that goes up 12 pips for them to make a 10 pip profit. If the market only goes up 11 pips and then reverses down, they do not make their profit and they'll have to get onto their trade. So they could be trapped into a trade. And if the market reverses down at 11 pips, I call that an 11 pip trap. This is an example. Bulls might buy one pip above the high of this bar, have limit orders to sell 10 pips above their entry, which is 11 pips above the buy signal bar. And then if it starts to drift down, these bull scalpers will be trapped. They'll be still in the trade, but without their profit. And at some point they give up. The bear scalpers know that the bulls will try to get out with a 10 pip profit. Fairly small day. So a lot of bulls will scalp for 10 pips. The bears will place limit orders to sell 10 pips above the high of a buy signal bar, betting that bulls will be selling there as well. Here, let's say you have bears expecting that you'll have trapped bulls and we'll get a reversal down. This is a final flag. Maybe we'll come down here or below. In any case, let's say bears sell one pip below this bull bar. The minimum scalp in forex markets is 10 pips. The market therefore has to fall 12 pips below this bar to make a profit, to make their minimum scalp. They sell one pip below the bar. It has to fall 10 more pips to hit their limit order. And for that limit order to be filled, it usually has to fall one more pip. So the market usually has to fall 12 pips for the bears to make 10 pips. If it starts to turn up before 12 pips, it's an 11 pip trap. That means the bears who sold are trapped. It hit 11 pips. Most of them did not get their 10 pips profit and it reverses up. At some point those bears give up. A lot of times if traders are concerned as the market's falling, let's say a trader sells below this bar and he's concerned that it's not falling as fast as he wants. He may change his order and try to get out one pip early. So instead of placing his order to make a 10 pip scalp, he'll try to get nine pips. And that means that there'll be support 10 pips down. The market has to fall 11 pips for him to get filled with his order 10 pips below the sell signal bar for him to exit with a nine pips profit. Also, you'll have opposite traders believing that the bears are scalping. So the opposite traders are the bulls and they'll expect support around this low. They'll think most of the bears will scalp out for 10 pips. So the bulls will look to buy around where the bear scalpers will be taking profits. The bulls will place limit orders about 10 pips below the low of this bar. The market has to fall 11 pips for those bulls to get their order filled. So you have bulls trying to buy 10 pips below this bar. You have bears trying to buy 11 or 12 pips below that bar. And that can result in the market not quite filling the bears. If enough bulls are buying and if enough bears are raising their limit order by one pip, a lot of times the market will fall 11 pips instead of 12 and reverse up. And that results in an 11 pip trap. Here, some bears might look at this and say, I don't know, maybe it's a 50% pullback. Maybe we'll get a double bottom. Maybe I was wrong trying to get 10 pips. Maybe I'll exit one pip early. Bulls know that. And they'll also be buying at the same price. Maybe about 10 pips below the low of this bar. It has to fall 11 pips to get filled. So sometimes you'll have so many buy limit orders, both bulls and bears buying, 11 pips below the low of the signal bar, that the market does not fall 12 and you get the reversal up. And you get an 11 pip trap. Bears trying to get out with 10 pips profit are now trapped. They do not get filled and they have to exit. And they gave up in here. Different data from different brokers. Also, there are many pips. So instead of 11 pips, it could be 11.3 pips, 11.9 pips. Also, because some charts only show the ask, the offer and not the actual trades, you might not get filled, even though it looks like you're getting filled. So forex traders trying to scalp for 10 pips, difficult thing to do. Most forex traders should not be doing that. But experienced forex traders can do that. But they can only do it if they can think fast. They have to make quick decisions. If they have a buy signal, they have to make quick decisions. I want to talk a little bit about fading weak setups. Fading means doing the opposite. So if there's a weak buy setup, traders will sell. traders will sell. Let's look at this. We're selling off and we're trying to reverse up. Some bears will look at that and say, oh, that's not a very good buy signal bar, especially after such a big bear bar. I bet the buy signal is going to fail. So the bulls buying at this high on a stop or one tick above this high on a stop are probably trapped or they will get trapped. So the bears will sell with a limit order exactly at that high. They'll sell at or slightly above. A lot of times I'll just place a limit order at that high and get filled right there, betting that it's a bad buy. Protective stop, either above the top of the sell climax or the top of the bear trend. My stop is up here. A lot of times when I take that short, I'll place a limit order to sell more one or two points higher, betting that it might go a little bit higher, maybe a 50% pullback, but odds are my stop will not get hit before I'm able to make a profit. So the bears sell this high and they sell more four ticks higher. It has to bounce five ticks to get filled. The bulls know their buy setup is weak. A lot of the bulls are simply trying to scalp for four ticks. It has to go up six ticks to get filled. We have a buy signal bar with a bear body after a very big bear bar. It's not a strong buy setup. Plus it's following a big bear bar. If the market goes up five ticks, it therefore hits the limit order for the bulls. So the bulls buy one tick above this bar. They get filled on that gray line right there. They place a limit order to take profits four ticks higher, which is this gray line. And you can see the market exactly hit their limit order. If it does not get filled pretty quickly, those bulls will get out, afraid that they'll be trapped, a five tick trap. So bulls and bears are both selling there. The bears are selling, betting that it's a weak buy signal, and the bulls are selling there as well. We have a lot of limit orders, four and five ticks above the high of a bad buy signal bar. And that can result in the price falling pretty quickly. Many of these bears, they'll sell the high of this bar and one point higher, they'll take profits at their first entry price. So they get out break even on their first sell, and with a one point profit on their second. And the bulls who bought on a stop one tick above this bar, when it's reversing down, they're trapped. They're trying to get out break even. So you have bulls and bears selling. Some of the bears will swing part of this. A lot will just simply scalp, depending on the context. If this is part of a huge bear trend, a lot of the bears will not take profits here. They'll hold for a swing down. The opposite is true if bulls think the bears have a bad sell setup. Bulls will buy the low of a bad sell signal bar. We have a bear trend. Maybe this is a bear flag. It lacks consecutive big bear bars. And we have a pretty good reversal bar here and a second bull bar here. Bears selling here are taking a chance that they'll get stopped out with a losing trade. A bad sell signal bar. And therefore, a lot of bulls will buy at that low, betting that the bear breakout will fail. And they'll look for a scalp. They might buy more 10 pips lower. But it requires an 11 pip sell-off for them to be able to scale in 10 pips lower. These are scale-in bull scalpers. Here we have a 14 pip sell-off. Bulls who bought this low, betting on the bad bear flag, they buy more 10 pips lower. It fell 14 pips so they would have been filled. Again, bulls only do this if they're confident that this is a bad bear flag and that it's going to lead to a trading range or even a rally instead of a continued bear trend. Bulls doing that, they might have to risk about 30 pips from their first entry. So they buy here, buy more 10 pips lower. Maybe they're willing to buy more 20 pips lower. In general, if you're doing that kind of trading, you have to risk about three times the size of a minimum scalp, 10 pips. So you have to risk about 30 pips. Most traders should not be doing this. They certainly should not be doing the scaling in. Experienced traders do it regularly. The bears know that selling below this bar is a bad short. Probably not going to be profitable. We have a bull body and consecutive bull bars and a weak sell-off. Arguably a wedge, three lows, one, two, three. Might get a couple of legs sideways to up. And these bears will be quick to buy back their shorts. Most of them, if they are scalping, are just looking for 10 pips. That means that there'll be a lot of buy limit orders about 12 pips or 11 pips below this low. So if the market falls 12 pips, probably buyers. Weak bear flag, so probably buyers at the prior low. Bears will be buying at the prior low to take profits. Bulls will be buying at this low, betting that will bounce up enough for a scalp. And bulls know that. So they'll buy here. They'll buy more 10 pips lower. Betting on a trading range. They can exit their entire position at their original entry price. Getting out break even on this first buy. And with a 10 pip profit on the second buy. Some bulls will not buy this low. They'll simply take the second entry 10 pips lower. Other bulls will say a new low probably will fail. And they'll simply place a limit order to buy at that low. And they'll try to get out at the place where theoretically bulls would begin to start to buy at this low. So profit taking area. If traders think the context is good enough for a swing up, they might swing part. But in general, small bars, permanent tails, small range, traders are scalping. In this video, I talked about 5 tick traps and 11 pip traps, where the market goes almost far enough for a scalp and then reverses. And finally, I talked about fading weak setups. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the seventh of seven videos on breakouts. This is going soon. This is me and I think the friend Bree Park who's beenidayter in place. Let's tai설igiani. And then I see the third day of this video. This has been the mid- accountant as it pretends on their flese. until next time. This happens every 15 days after this continues. That will take place in order. To Marshall IS expressed. I'll go ahead and get the spot on the left. Now, I'll show you. This is directlySHVE In the East. So the other time the next one will cover. Because if this happens all this be started, it's diode on the right. So if uplifted is strongARE.