 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of two videos on tight channels and microchannels. I'll begin by giving you my definition of a tight channel, and then I'll move on and tell you what I mean when I talk about a microchannel. The simplest definition is that a tight channel is a channel where there's not much space between the lines. For example, look at this bull trend. The channel is fairly tight. When a channel is tight like that, it's usually a breakout on a higher timeframe, and therefore, traders should only trade in the direction of the trend. This is a bull trend. Traders should only look to buy. The space between the lines is not very big. And that's what I mean by a tight channel. The channel is tight. The swings are small. The pullbacks are only a bar or two, and they do not fall very far from the low of the prior bar. Here we fell a few ticks or a few pips down before the trend resumed. When a channel is tight like this, it's very difficult to make money shorting. Even with limit orders, selling at the high of the prior bar, scaling in higher, it's very difficult to make money. And it's certainly very difficult to make money trading with stops against the trend. Selling below that bar, selling below either of these bars, selling below that bar. Those are all losing strategies. Traders should only be buying when there's a tight bull channel. Selling with stops and a tight bull channel. It's going to result in just repeated losses. If ever you find yourself selling with stops and losing repeatedly, you have to assume that the channel is tight. And once you've made that decision, you have to be thinking about only buying. Five minute chart, fairly tight bull channel. The pullbacks only last a few bars, do not fall very far. Here's a 30 minute chart. Same thing. Same market. 30 minute chart. Five minute chart. 30 minute chart. It's a micro channel. It's a strong breakout. Series of bull bars closing at or near their highs, certainly above the mid points. There are some bear bars, but their lows do not go below the low of the prior bar. And the following bar does not go below the low of the bear bar, triggering any stop entry short. When a 30 minute chart looks like this, you should only buy. When a five minute chart looks like that, you have to assume the 30 minute chart looks like this. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe and it's better only to look to buy. Trade it like a breakout. Only look to buy. It is a breakout on the next timeframe up. 15 minute, 30 minute chart. I want to put into words some parameters that give you an idea of when a channel is tight. For example, look at the size of an average bar and all of the pullbacks are less than twice the size of an average bar. The pullbacks are small. If an average bar is about eight ticks tall, then the pullbacks are less than 16 ticks. Here is an average bar, maybe eight ticks tall. This is the pullback. It's less than 16 ticks from that high to this low, from this high to that low, from this high to any of these lows. That is a sign that a channel is tight and you should only be buying, not selling. Here are some pullbacks. This pullback is 19 ticks, more than twice the size of an average bar. But look at all the other pullbacks. They're all less than 16 ticks, less than twice the size of an average bar. Therefore, traders should not be selling. You can also decide whether or not a channel is tight based upon the size of the smallest scalp. In the E-mini, the smallest scalp is 4 ticks, one point. So if the pullbacks are all less than 8 to 12 ticks, you should assume that the channel is tight. If the pullbacks are all less than 2 to 3 times the size of the smallest scalp, the trend is tight, the channel is tight, and you should only look to sell. 11 tick pullback from the low to the top of the pullback, from the low to the top of the pullback, 7 tick pullback. The average pullback is not 3 times bigger than the smallest scalp, one point. Therefore, it's better to assume that the channel is tight. And a tight bear channel, it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Better only to sell. In any tight channel, never trade against the trend, even with limit orders. If you buy this low, and you scale in lower, it never comes back to your first entry price. The gap stays open, you lose. If you buy this low, it never gets back to your entry price. So even scaling in, you lose. So you can't even make money with limit orders. And you certainly cannot make money with stop orders if you're buying in a tight bear channel. Pullbacks are too small to make money, even with limit orders. You will lose money. Even if you win on 70% of the trades, the losers are going to be significantly bigger than the winners. You will lose money. Look at this chart of the Euro versus the dollar, a 5-minute chart. All the pullbacks are less than twice the size of an average bar. If an average bar on this chart is about 10 pips tall, the pullbacks are all less than 20 pips. And that is one of the criteria I use to determine whether or not a channel is tight. When that is the case, the channel is tight. Here, the average bar is about 10 pips tall. And here's the size of the pullback. From the top of the trend to the pullback, top of the trend to the pullback, top of the trend to the pullback, top of the trend to the bottom of the pullback. All of the pullbacks are less than twice the size of an average bar. Therefore, the pullbacks are small, the channel is tight, and traders should only look to buy. Another way to do it is base your determination on the size of the smallest scalp. In the Euro versus the dollar, as in all Forex markets, the smallest scalp should be 10 pips. If all of the pullbacks are less than 2 to 3 times the size of the smallest scalp, you should only trade in the direction of the trend. You should conclude that the channel is a tight bull channel and therefore do not sell. For example, if the smallest scalp is 10 pips and the pullbacks are all less than 20 or 30 pips, the channel is therefore tight. Tight channels, you only trade in the direction of the trend. This is a bull trend, a tight bull channel, you should only look to buy. This shows the size of the pullbacks, and they're all small. They're all less than 14 pips. That's less than 2 to 3 times the size of the smallest scalp. The smallest scalp is 10 pips. All of these pullbacks are less than 20 or 30 pips. Therefore, traders should only buy. Do not sell. In any tight channel, bull or bear never trade against the trend. The pullbacks are too small. So even if you're trading against the trend using limit orders, you will lose money. And that's true even if you win on 70% of your trades. The losses will be sufficiently bigger than the wins so that you will end up losing money. I want to talk a little bit about what constitutes a micro channel in contrast to a tight channel. I want to talk a little bit about different types of tight channels, some variations of tight channels. A micro channel means no pullbacks. For example, here we have 5 bars without a pullback, and then we have a pullback here. This low went below that low. So this is a micro channel. And then again here, 4 bars or so, 5 bars without a pullback. Another micro channel within a tight bull channel. Small pullback bull trend. This is a small pullback bull trend. The pullbacks are all small. One bar, one bar. Very tiny pullbacks. This entire trend is a small pullback bull trend. That is a tight bull channel. A parabolic wedge, this is not a parabolic wedge, but a parabolic wedge, a small pullback point and a small pullback trend. Here we have a small pullback bull trend. This is not a parabolic wedge, but a parabolic wedge is also a type of tight bull channel. And then any tight trading range is a type of micro channel, except that it's horizontal. Remember, all trading ranges are contained between two lines, one above, one below. And therefore, all trading ranges are channels. But unlike trend channels, they're trading range channels. They're horizontal sideways channels. During these 11 bars, every low is at or above the low of the prior bar. And therefore, it is a micro channel, which is a very special type of tight channel. It's a tight channel where there are no pullbacks. This bar traded below the low of that bar, and it began the micro channel. This bar traded below the low of that bar. It ended the micro channel. It's hard to see, but in fact, that bar did trade slightly below the low of that bar. Another type of tight channel is a small pullback trend. Here we have a trend, a bear trend, and the pullbacks are all small. The pullbacks last only a bar, two or three. So one bar, one bar, maybe total of four bars here. But the pullbacks are not very big. On a higher timeframe chart, a very tight channel like this is either a micro channel or a breakout. No pullbacks. A parabolic wedge is also a type of tight channel. We have three pushes up, one or one, and then two or two, and then three. The wedge often does not look like a wedge shape. If I connected this high to that high, it would not look like a wedge at all. I think the way the market looks at this is one, two, and then three, a failed breakout above the top of the wedge. A parabolic wedge top like this usually is climactic. Usually the third push goes above the line connecting the first and second push. And you often get a failed breakout and then a reversal. A tight trading range. That is a type of tight channel as well. Except the channel is sideways. It's not a trend channel. I could draw a line across the lows. I could draw a line across the highs. And therefore it's a channel, but it's horizontal. The market fell for nine bars. No pullbacks. The market tried to reverse here, but this bar did not go above the high of that bar. The market tried to continue up here. This bar did not go above its high. And therefore it's a micro channel, part of a micro channel. The bears controlled the market for nine bars. Nine bars with no high going above the high of the prior bar. That is the definition of a micro channel. The bulls are trapped in. The bears are trapped out. The best the bulls probably can hope for is a trading range, not a bull trend. We finally get a reversal. We finally get a bar that goes above the high of the prior bar. So this is a pullback in a bear micro channel. It's probably a minor reversal. It's very unlikely that a nine bar bear micro channel is going to turn into a bull trend. Much more likely the best the bulls get is only a trading range. Because of that, traders will bet the bulls will fail. So they'll sell above bars. They'll sell above the high of the prior bar. They'll assume the reversal up will fail and they'll sell below the low of the prior bar. And again here. Now we have a small double top bear flag. Bears will sell below the low either of that bar or better below the low of this bar, a bear bar closing near its low. Depending on resumption of the trend down. This bar led to a pullback. We have a little pullback here. And then we have eight bars down without a pullback. This bar went above the high of that bar. So that ended the bear micro channel. Eight bar bear micro channel. A lot of selling. Five bear bars closing below their midpoints. Several of the bars closing on or near their lows. The bears are really eager to sell. Lots of gaps. The close of this bar at the low of that bar. The close of this bar at the low of that bar. The bears are eager to sell at low prices. The market's probably going lower. This is the dollar versus the Canadian dollar. A 15 minute chart. And look at the pullbacks. It's a small pullback bull trend. Now look at this bear bar. What follows? Is it another big bear bar? Are we getting consecutive big bear bars? No. No consecutive big bear bars. The pullback lasted one bar. Here lasted two bars. So the pullbacks are brief. Only lasting one, two or three bars. Also, here's the moving average. Most of the bars are above the moving average. And in fact, the market's above the moving average for 20 or more bars. Again, here. Very strong bull trend. A very tight channel. When the market looks like that, you only buy. Since the pullbacks are not deep enough to make profits if you sell. When the market's in a bull trend like this, a small pullback bull trend, a very tight bull channel, the buy setups never look good enough. Yet, weak bulls keep getting trapped out. They keep waiting for a big pullback. They keep hoping to buy. They want to buy a pullback. But the pullbacks just never look good enough. But a small pullback bull trend like this is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Traders have to buy. They buy for any reason. They buy below bars. They buy bear closes. They buy above bars. They buy bull closes. You have to get long. And the correct stop is always much further away than what you want it to be. The correct stop is below the bottom of the most recent higher low. Once you determine that the market's in a small pullback bull trend like this, typically every pullback ends at a higher low. So it allows you to use a tighter stop than what you might think. If you buy here or anywhere in here, your stop is below there. And if you start going up here, your stop initially is below here. But after a few bars, you'll probably raise your stop to there. In this video, I talked about tight channels and microchannels and what parameters I use to define both. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on tight channels and microchannels.