 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of six videos on trading ranges. I'll begin by talking about how every trading range always contains both buy and sell setups, and the setups are reasonable. I'll move on and talk about breakout mode. The trading range has a 50% chance in general of a bull breakout and a 50% chance of a bear breakout. And finally, I'll talk about second leg traps. Trading ranges are always trying to break out into a trend. There's often a first leg that's not particularly strong, and then a pullback, and then a very strong second leg, and it looks like the start of a trend. However, it very often is a trap, and I refer to that as a second leg trap. And those traps usually reverse and go to the opposite side of the trading range. Take a look at this chart. Clearly in a trading range, you could say the trading range began over here. But let's just use this part of it right here to illustrate a point. Every trading range always, 100% of the time, has both a reasonable buy setup and a reasonable sell setup. And whenever you look at a chart and there's both a reasonable reason to buy and a reasonable reason to sell, you know the market's in a trading range. My 80% rule, 80% of the time, the trading range breakout attempts will fail, and the trading range will continue. We tried to reverse down, we tried to break to the upside, we tried to reverse down from a double top or a higher high. We tried to break to the upside, tried to break to the downside, tried to go up to the upside again. Finally, it appears that the market might be breaking to the downside. 80% of breakout attempts, no matter how strong they look, will fail when the market's in a trading range. We have a bull trend in the trading range. And every trading range in a bull trend has both a double bottom of some kind. And the bulls hope that the double bottom bull flag will result in a bull breakout and a resumption of the bull trend. And every trading range has some kind of a major trend reversal. Here we have a lower high major trend reversal. And it's also a head and shoulders top, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Here's a trading range in a bear trend. And every trading range, whether it's in a bull trend or a bear trend, will have both a reasonable sell setup and a reasonable buy setup. We have a double top bear flag, a slightly higher high double top bear flag, and then a smaller double top for the second of the two tops. But basically a double top bear flag. And the bulls see a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout, higher low, not enough bars for a major reversal. So we got a minor reversal. Now we have a double bottom and plenty of bars for a major reversal. So a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. 50% chance there will be a successful bull breakout and a reversal of the bear trend. 50% chance there'll be a successful bear breakout and a resumption of the bear trend. I say that, but unless the setup is especially strong, I think the prior trend still has a slightly higher probability of resumption than reversal. Another feature of trading ranges is the top and bottom are never all that clear. Every trading range eventually breaks out into a trend. And there's about a 50% chance of a bull breakout and a 50% chance of a bear breakout. In addition, there's a 50% chance that the first breakout attempt will fail. It'll reverse. Again, my 80% rule, 80% of breakout attempts will fail. The market has inertia and it continues to do what it has been doing for a long, long time. Because 80% of the breakout attempts up or down fail, traders look to buy low, sell high and scalp. You scalp because you assume the market is not going to break out. 80% of the breakout attempts fail. So you have a better chance to make money by taking quick profits. Beginners are naturally hopeful that a strong move near the bottom will result in a bear trend. A strong rally at the top will result in a bull trend. And they end up buying high. They see strong bars near the top. Here we have five bars without a bear body. And they think that because we've broken above all the bars to the left, this is the start of a bull trend. And here they now see seven consecutive bull bars. And they think, wow, this is really gaining strength. It's going to become a bull trend. And they end up buying at the top. And at the bottom, they'll see five or six consecutive bear bars. And then another breakout with a follow through bar. And they assume that the bear trend will be successful. But with all the trading range price action to the left, the odds are all of these breakout attempts will fail. Beginners end up buying at the top and selling at the bottom, which is the exact opposite of what the experts are doing. A lot of traders have a good sense of where the approximate top and bottom of the range is. And they're confident enough that the breakout attempts will fail so that they begin to buy as the market is in the buy zone near the bottom. And they begin to sell when the market is near the top in the sell zone. They use wide stops and they scale in confident that the breakout attempts will fail and the market will reverse and they'll make a profit. Again, experienced traders are confident that no matter how strong a breakout looks, it's going to fail and the market will reverse. Another strong breakout attempt, reverse. Strong bull breakout attempts at the top and they reverse down. Because traders know that the breakouts are unlikely, they're also going to be taking quick profits. They tend to scalp when the market's in a trading range. For example, a lot of trading range price action here. We're trying to get a bull breakout. Maybe strong enough for a second leg down. Maybe this is the end of the second leg. Maybe we get a double bottom. Some bulls will buy here, use a wide stop and look to scale in lower. Another breakout below this double bottom. The bulls are confident it will not get very far. Some bulls will buy more above this good looking bull bar. Other bulls will hold on to their original position. If the second entry is less than a scalp distance away from this entry, a lot of traders will not add to their position. On the other hand, if the second entry is bigger than the size of a scalp, a lot of them will add on. And then they'll get out break even on their first entry or on the entire trade. Others will take the second entry and just hold and look for some kind of top in the top half of the trading range and then they'll exit. When you're in the top half, top third of the trading range, traders begin to look for reasons to sell. A break above this high probably will fail, probably will not get far. Some bears will sell here. Others will wait for a strong bear bar and then sell below the low. Here it's a second entry short. Down, this bar fell below that bar. Triggering a first entry short, you can argue a wedge. One, two, three or one, two, three. With four or five bull bars up here, a lot of traders would prefer a second entry short and to sell below a bear bar. So they might sell here. And their stop might be here. They might use a wider stop to allow for the possibility of one more minor high before they get a swing down. A lot of traders, when the market's in a trading range, expect every breakout attempt to come back above the breakout point. They'll place a buy limit order to buy at that low and they'll get filled here. And then they'll place additional limit orders to buy lower. In general, it's better to take a second entry if it's at least the size of a scalp below. And then if the market gets back to your original entry price, you make a scalp profit on your second price and you can get out break even on your first. Or if the context is good, you might try to get a scalp on your first entry as well. Again, new low. A lot of bulls will place a buy limit order to buy at the most recent low. So they'll buy here. And if it falls for the size of a scalp or two times the size of a scalp, they'll buy more lower. Others will wait for the reversal up and buy above this bull reversal bar. These are examples of limit order buys at prior lows. And here's a scale in. Traders use wide stops, confident that the bear breakouts will not result in a bear trend and that they'll reverse fairly soon. The bottoms are rarely ever clear. However, traders have a good sense of approximately where the market will reverse. They know this is a reasonable buy zone, a bottom third of the screen. And they know this is a reasonable sell zone. So traders will start selling either below bars here, here, a second entry short here, or above bars at this high and then sell more higher. As I said, many traders will buy more lower if the second entry is at least the size of a scalp below the first entry. And the same at the top. They'll sell at a prior high, sell at a prior high, and they'll add on. A lot of traders will add on. Some traders will add on two or three times and use a wide stock, confident that the bull breakout will fail and that the market will come down to their original entry. price and they'll be able to get out break even on the first entry and with a profit on their later entries. Again, you can scale in. If you do scale in, you have to trade small enough so that the total dollars you stand to lose if your stop is hit are no more than what you would lose on any other trade. And as I said, whenever you scale in, it's usually better to only scale in if the second entry is at least the size of a minimum scalp. I'm going to talk now about breakout mode. In other words, the market is sideways in a trading range and traders are expecting a breakout. Remember my 80% rule, 80% of trading range breakouts fail, except when the market is in breakout mode. If there's a reason to expect a breakout to occur fairly soon, the probability of a successful breakout is higher. We have a triangle, a series of lower highs and higher lows. So we have a bear trend and a bull trend and we're getting near the apex of the triangle. I said before 50% of breakout attempts when you're in breakout mode fail and we tried to get a bear breakout and then we reversed up. I also said 50% of the time when the market's in breakout mode, the breakout will be a bear breakout. The ultimate successful breakout will be a bear breakout and 50% of time the ultimate successful breakout will be a bull breakout. Here we had a failed bear breakout happens half the time that the initial breakout fails. And then we ultimately had a successful bull breakout. We have a breakout breakout breakout. Lower highs, bear trend. Higher lows, bull trend. And the result is a triangle. Again, probability of a failed breakout and a reversal from that breakout, 50%. The probability of a successful breakout is 50%. We have a triangle, 50% chance the ultimate breakout will be up, 50% chance it'll be down, 50% chance the first breakout will fail. Here the bearers tried to reverse the first breakout but they were unsuccessful and this first breakout ultimately did succeed. Another trading range, 50% chance of a reversal before reaching a profit target. We had a failed bear breakout and then we had a failed bull breakout. The bulls see this as a high two, a double bottom bull flag. The bears see this as a higher high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bull trend here, break below the bull trend line by going sideways. An attempt to resume the bull trend that failed and formed a higher high major trend reversal. I want to talk some about second leg traps. I think they're very important and they create a major problem for traders starting out. Here we have a bull channel, maybe a wedge, one, two, three. Complex first leg up. The bears tried to reverse down. But then look what happened. Four bull bars closing well above their midpoints. Two of them are very big bars closing at their highs. It looks like this will result in a second leg up. So the first reversal down bulls probably will buy and will then resume up. I say that without showing the bars on the left. If this is still part of a big trading range or if it's a part of a big broad bear channel, then the odds of this being a successful breakout are much less. Traders want to see what the follow through looks like. We're getting a bull breakout above a bull channel. And you know that 75% of the time, if you have a bull breakout of a bull channel, it's going to reverse down within about five bars. In fact, if you have a bull or a bear breakout of a bull channel, it will reverse within about five bars. For example, I could draw a line along the bottom and we have a bear breakout below that channel. And then we reversed up. If this exact breakout was occurring out of a trading range, the odds would be 60% chance we would get a measured move up. But because it's a bull breakout of a bull channel, 75% chance it's going to fail. Remember the market cycle. A trend starts with a breakout, moves on to a channel and then to a trading range. That's what happens 75% of the time. Only 25% of the time, do you get a bull breakout, a bull channel, and then another bull breakout, starting the market cycle over again. So bull breakout, pull back, and then another channel before the trading range begins. Because this is a bull breakout of a bull channel and not a bull breakout of a trading range, 75% chance it's going to fail within about five bars. As I said, this is a tight channel. You can call it a complex first leg up, a wedge top. The bears tried to reverse and failed. And now the bulls are again trying. So this is a second leg up. And look what followed. Strong bull breakout, terrible follow through. Probably buyers below. Bulls will probably buy the first reversal down. And they did. But not for a swing. They were scalping out. The bulls who bought this closed, disappointed by this. A lot of them bought more. Maybe a scalp below. And tried to get out break even at their original entry. And now we have a micro double top. And a second failed breakout above the top of the channel. Here's the first failed breakout above the top of the channel. And this is the second one. Most bulls would get out below this bar. And the result is a give up bar here or here. And bears will sell below this bar. Not many bears will sell here after this much strength. Once the breakout fails a second time. A lot of bears will start selling. And this is an example of a second leg trap. Strong second leg. Beginners see the four bull bars. And they believe the market cycle is starting over. And that it's going to lead to a measured move up. And a swing up. But they're overlooking the reality. That this is a bull breakout above a bull channel. And 75% of the time you're going to get this. A reversal down to the bottom of the channel. Complex two legged rally. The first leg was a wedge. And then a reversal attempt. And now another breakout. And then a second reversal attempt. You can also call it a complex top if you want. We tried to top out here. It failed. We tried to resume up. And that failed. This then is the second top. The wedge top is the first. This micro double top is the second. Bulls disappointed by this bear bar. They get out break even here or here. And the bulls that did not give up here. A second entry for a failed breakout of anything. It's a higher probability trade. And this is a second entry for a failed breakout above a bull channel. And it has a good sell signal bar. And it follows a first entry that also had a good sell signal bar. So this is a higher probability sell. Big up, big down. So big confusion. Big confusion usually means the market is going to go sideways. And it went sideways for about 10 bars. Reasonably strong bear breakout. Probably sellers above. Probably the first reversal up. Bears will sell it. And then a second leg down. But sometimes the second leg is brief. Only a single bar. For example, after this big bull breakout, this was the second leg. Just a single bar. At this point, traders are hopeful that this is a bull breakout below this bear channel. And that it results in a measuring gap. Maybe they'll look at it as a double bottom. This low, that low. And a bear break below a double bottom. A double bottom is a trading range. A lot of traders are hoping that this is a bear break up below the bottom of a trading range. But is it really? We're still above this low. This may be a sell vacuum test to the bottom of a bigger trading range down here. Yes, we've broken below a double bottom. Good for the bears. Big tail on the bottom of the bar. The bars are not all that big. We're still above the bottom of the bull trend. This could be a second leg trap. Again, a complex two legs down. This could be the first leg down. And then a pull back. And then a strong second attempt down. You got to watch out. It could fail. The bears hope it's a double top bear flag. So bear trend, double top bear flag. The bears hope it's a failed breakout below a double bottom. But look to the left. We still might be in a trading range. And look at the follow through after the breakout. And then the reversal up in a second bar. At this point, a lot of the bears would be concluding that it's a second leg trap. And that we're going to have more trading range price action to the right, which we did. This could be the first leg down. You could say this is the first leg down. All of this is the pull back from the first leg down. You can call it an expanding triangle or trading range. So first leg down and then a pull back, a complex pull back. And then a second leg down. And the second leg down failed. Trapped traders into selling low in what would possibly be a trading range. Again, we're below the bottom here and this big tail here. And the bad follow through after bear bars here. Bear, bull, bear, bull, bear, bull. It looks like the bears are taking control. But as soon as they broke below the bottom of this upper range here, they had a big tail here. They tried to resume down a gap close of this bar below that low immediately reversed up. So these bears are at this point really concerned. They look to the left and say, uh oh, maybe this is not a successful breakout. Maybe this is just the second leg down in a big trading range. Trading ranges are filled with two legged moves. One leg up, pull back, second leg up. One leg down, pull back, second leg down. Second leg traps, they always look strong enough so that traders believe the odds are there'll be one more leg up. But instead you get the reversal. You have to be very careful buying above a bold channel. You have to be very careful buying near the bottom of what appears to be a trading range. The second legs are often stronger than the first. This clearly is stronger than that. This is not really stronger than that, but it's still a fairly strong second leg. Just like two legs up here, this second leg is stronger than that first leg. And it's always tricking beginners into believing that it's a successful breakout. It is of these past 20 bars, but not above the top of the entire range. And the beginners buy here or they buy up here. They sell down here, hoping for the breakout. Ignoring the reality that 80% of trading range breakout attempts fail, no matter how strong they are. And very often the second leg is especially strong. Looking like it's going to result in a breakout, but it does not. Bears get trapped into selling low, just like bulls get trapped into buying high. And if you do buy up here, you have to get up, especially a second entry short with bear bars. If you do sell down here, not a very strong breakout. I think you have to get out above this bar. A failed breakout below this double bottom and a higher low still in this trading range. Again, another second leg trap. Two legs up. The second leg stronger than the first. Beginners buy. They only see this and they ignore this. They ignore that we're still within the trading range. Here, you can say this is above that low and maybe this is the start of a broad bull channel. So we have a higher low, strong second leg up. Maybe we'll get a higher high. And it could be. However, it's also possible to be a second leg trap in a trading range. And whenever the market is in the top third of what appears to be a trading range or what could reasonably be a trading range, I think it's better to look to take profits and begin to look to sell. This is what the bulls are hoping. They have a higher low and they're hoping that this will be above that and that we're in a broad bull channel and they can take profits above that high. However, once you see this, you got to get out. You have to assume it's probably a trading range, especially when it's a second leg one pullback to, especially when it's a strong second leg followed by a strong bear reversal bar. Strong sell off, five consecutive bars here. Bears are hoping that it's a lower high and maybe it's the start of a bear trend and maybe it'll sell off below this low. They want a broad bear channel, but I always assume it's a trading range unless I have strong evidence to believe otherwise. In this video, I talked about how every trading range always contains both a reasonable buy and a reasonable sell setup. I then moved on to breakout mode when a trading range has gone on long enough and the price action indicates that a breakout is probably going to be happening soon. You have to be prepared for the breakout. 50% chance the first breakout attempt up or down will fail. 50% chance that the profitable final successful breakout will be up. 50% chance it will be down. And second leg traps. They occur in broad bull and bear channels and they especially occur in trading ranges. Whenever you see an especially strong second leg up or down, look to the left. Has the breakout gone far above all the bars to the left or could it simply be a test of the top or bottom of the trading range? In which case you have to assume it's a second leg trap and that it will reverse. So do not buy high and do not sell low unless you're sure the trading range has ended and that a successful breakout is underway. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching The Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of six videos on trading rangers. Thank you.