 This is Al Brooks. This is the second of three videos on trading at the end of the day. I want to talk about buying the close-type rallies at the end of the day or sell the close-type bear trends at the end of the day. They're common and they're important. You can see there are rallies here at the end of the day. This is a buy the close finish. Traders are buying closes. They're buying at the market. But it's easiest to think of it as buying the close. The close of the bars are important. The same with this. Buy the close market. Here, buy the close market. And whenever you have a buy the close market, the market is going toward resistance. Resistance is always a magnet. Even if it's not obvious, these buy the close rallies are always being pulled up to some resistance level. So it's helpful to know where the resistance is because you don't want to be buying right below the resistance. So for example, if you know there's a measured move target here, you might not want to buy closes once you get within a couple points of that target. You want to be buying down here and looking to take profits somewhere up here. We have a sell-off, a pullback, and a bear trend. Any rally up here has the potential to create a double top bear flag or a double top lower high major trend reversal. And therefore, this is resistance. And the rally might simply be a test of that resistance. And then when it gets there, it could go sideways. So you don't want to be buying closes when the market starts to get very close to the rally. You want to be buying them early. The high of the open, the low of the open, we have a breakout. We have a gap between this low and that high. Therefore, there's a potential measured move up. And if you see the market's starting to rally at the end of the day, it might be rallying toward that resistance. Also, the top of the bull channel is there as well. And therefore, you don't want to be buying closes up here. If you're going to be buying closes, you're going to be buying here or here. And then looking to take profits near the end of the day at resistance. When the market gets near resistance, it often gets pulled up there very quickly, even if it looks like it's starting to stall. Here we have a couple of dojis and then we have a big bull bar. Here we have a couple of small bars below resistance, but the market is within the gravitational pull of that magnet. Very often, it cannot escape that pull and it accelerates up to the magnet. Everyone believes it's going there. The bears don't want to sell here if they know it's going here. So the bears stop selling. The bulls know it's going there. So the high frequency trading firms will buy even to make just a few ticks. A lot of times the market accelerates up toward a magnet, accelerating up toward resistance. We have a trading range, bull trend resumption toward the magnet. And once it gets to the magnet, the magnetism gets turned off, at least briefly. Sometimes the trend will continue up. Sometimes it'll reverse. Sometimes it goes sideways. But in any case, you have to be ready for the price action to change. Change from a strong bull trend into something else. Therefore, you have to be prepared to take profits. Here we get up to the magnet. Instead of continuing up or reversing down, it became a trading range, a limit order market. And traders should not be trading with limit orders at the end of the day. Too often, they will run out of time and they will not make money. They'll lose money. My general rule is once the market becomes buy the close, get out one tick below any bear bar, for example, below this bar, or three to five ticks below any bull bar. We have a bull bar here. Bulls will get out three, four, five ticks below the bull bar. Depending on how big the rally is. If the bars are small and the rally is small, they'll get out sooner. If the bars are big and the rally is big, they'll allow more room. And they'll get out one tick below a bear bar. Here's a bear bar. If they're still long, they'll get out below that bear bar. The bears know the bulls are getting out. The bears know that it's at resistance. They know the bulls will not buy again, and therefore aggressive bears will sell exactly where the bulls are getting out. And the bears are hoping to get a scalp down, and sometimes they get a swing down, a reversal at the end of the day. A bear bar closing on its low. I'll buy the closed bulls to get out there, especially since we're at resistance. We're a little bit above this major lower high. Many bears will sell, taking a chance that we'll get a sell-off at the end of the day that will fall far enough for them to make a scalp. If a bear did sell that, and then we have a bull bar following it, or soon following it, the bears will get out above the bull bar. Some bulls will buy, knowing that the bears will get out for a small scalp out. Most traders should not be doing this, taking the sell or taking the buy. About once or twice a month, you'll have a buy the closed finish and a reversal that leads to a profitable trade. If you're an experienced trader, you can take that trade. Look at the time here. It's around 11 o'clock, and we're beginning to get a buy the closed finish. Whenever you have a buy the closed finish that starts too early, like 11 o'clock, it's usually not going to make it to the end of the day. And therefore, if you do get a buy the closed finish that's starting early, be prepared for it to end and enter a trading range or reverse, especially in a trading range day. If it was a strong bull trend day, then you could get a buy the closed finish that could start at any time. You could just rally all day long. But if the day is mostly sideways, and you get a buy the closed finish that's starting with more than an hour left to the day, it's probably not going to make it to the end of the day. Usually, a buy the closed finish, if it's going to last to the end of the day, will start around 1230. By the closed, bulls will exit below a bear bar, especially a bear bar closing on its low, especially at a resistance level, like a prior high in a trading range day. Now, why would bulls not buy above a bull bar here? Because we're at resistance, and the bull bar did not even close on its high. They could wait for a second signal, but it never came. Here's a potential second signal, potential second signal above this bull bar, but it never triggered. The market never went above the bull bars, and in fact, it became sell the close here. Some bears would take that second signal short below this bear bar, not the doji, but the bear bar closing on its low, hoping for a swing down in the trading range day, and possibly a sell the close strong bear sell off. Once you start getting dojis here, it becomes very difficult to trade, and it's usually better to get out. For example, above the high of this doji bar. At the end of the day, you'll often see a sell the close bear trend, a series of bear bars closing at or near their lows. It's always a test of support, even if the support is not obvious. I always look for the support because I know that if the sell the close trend lasts four or five bars, it's probably not going to last much more. And I look for support after around the fourth bar. If it's nearby, I stop selling closes. For example, support for a measured move down. We have a trading range, and we have an acceleration down. Trading range, the market accelerated down. Therefore, once it starts to get near that measured move target at the end of the day, I usually stop selling closes here or here. These two bear bars. Testing a major higher low. So it's good to sell the close through here, but when it gets down near there, it's usually better to stop selling closes. A bull bar. Most traders would get out above the high of that bull bar, especially since we're starting to form a trading range. Even though there's room down to support, it might not get there. It might form a higher low. We have a low, higher low. This might be another higher low. We have a little bit of overlap with a pair of dojis, possibly a measuring gap. And therefore, when the market starts to get near the measured move target, even though it's a big bear bar, I usually do not sell that close. Remember, when the market starts to get near support, if traders start to believe it's going to get to support, are the bulls going to buy above support? No. They're going to wait until it gets to support. Therefore, there's an absence of buyers and the market can accelerate down. Also, when it gets near support, the high-frequency trading firms believe it's going to get to support and they'll sell aggressively to make a one or two tick profit. And the result is the market can accelerate down to support and then stop going down and sometimes reverse. The closer to the magnet, the stronger the magnetic pull and you'll often get a big bear bar right at support. And then the market stops. The magnet gets turned off and the price action changes. So instead of a sell the close finish, it either reverses into a bull trend, maybe a buy the close finish or a trading range. Sometimes it'll collapse through it, but usually not. Remember, when you're trying to trade a buy the close finish or a sell the close finish, you're trading in the final hour or even the final half hour. And therefore, you don't have a lot of time left to make money and you do not have a lot of bars that will allow you to enter. Typically, you'll be able to enter once or twice and that'll be it. Since there's usually a reversal or a pause after four, five or six bars, traders should not be looking to enter on the sixth or seventh bar of a buy the close or sell the close market. And if you entered early, like after the first, second or third bar, you should be getting ready to exit quickly after the fourth, fifth or sixth bar. Usually, you need at least a couple bars before you're confident that it's going to be a sell the close finish or buy the close finish. And therefore, you're usually entering on the third or fourth bar. Nobody's going to be selling every close, but you might be able to sell one or two closes, sometimes three. If you get a bull bar closing on its high, get out one tick above that bull bar because the sell the close finish typically will end and the market will either go sideways or reverse up. After four or five, sell the close bars, especially if the market's near support, it's usually better not to sell closes. For example, had you sold these final two closes, you would have gotten out above the bull bar and you would have lost money. By the close, certainly by the second close and third close, it's going to be a buy the close rally. A good opportunity to make money, probability high that you will make money. A lot of bulls will exit on the first reversal down if there's a bear bar. This is only a bear doji and therefore there probably will even be buyers below the low of that bar. So a lot of bulls will not get out below a little bear doji, but they will get out below a bear bar with a decent body closing on its low. Some bulls will even buy with a limit order at the low of that bear doji and risk about four ticks down because they know that a lot of buy the close bulls will get out four ticks down. Therefore, if it falls four or five ticks down, it's probably not going to remain buy the close. However, if it only falls one or two ticks below that bear bar, a lot of bulls will buy looking for at least a little bit more up. Here we have a big bull bar. It looks like a resumption of buy the close, but you're at an important resistance level and you've already had five or six buy the close bars in the rally. And you're near the top of a trading match day as well. Usually better not to buy it, especially if you have a big bar. Whenever you get a big bar late in the buy the close rally or late in the sell the close bear trend, it might be a vacuum test of a target. Therefore, it might be the end of the trend instead of the start of an even stronger leg up. Always get out below a strong bear bar in a buy the close finish. The best time to look for a buy the close rally at the end of the day, 12 o'clock, usually after 1230, 1235. Here, we're getting a sell the close finish, but it's only 11 o'clock and it's a bull trend day. You have to be suspicious that it's not going to make it all the way to the end of the day. Here, you're getting a buy the close finish, but there are only a few bars left for the day. Therefore, not much time for a profit potential. This is too late to be buying closes. This is too early for a sell the close finish to make it to the end of the day. And therefore, if you're taking this as a sell the close market, you definitely have to get out above a bull bar. Bayer is trying to get a sell the close finish. You might conclude that it's sell the close after the second or third bar, but not enough bars left in the day to be trading this late as a sell the close swing trade. A lot of days have basically a limit order finish to the day, a trading range, a fairly tight trading range. Most traders should not trade that at all. Traders who do trade tight trading ranges prefer to have them earlier in the day, not in the final hour. And they'll trade them with limit orders, selling above bars using wide stops, scaling in and scalping, and buying below bars using wide stops, scaling in and scalping. Late in the day, you do not have enough time to use wide stops, scale in and scalp. And therefore, that strategy is a losing strategy. Finally, it's late in the day. You're tired. You're more prone to make mistakes. You're also more likely to make decisions too slowly. And therefore, trading at the end of the day in a tight trading range is a losing strategy for most traders. Experienced traders will sometimes do it. But for the most part, if you see the market starting to go sideways in the final hour, you're probably not going to be able to get any good trading for the remainder of the day. At the end of the day, final hour or so, you should only be looking for trades where you can enter on the close, like buy the close, sell the close, which is a market type of order, or with a stop. For example, if you have a bull trend and you're getting a pullback, you can buy on a stop as the pullback resumes up. About once a month, you'll have a buy the close rally with a good reversal bar and enough time left for a sell. You can take that sell, or you'll have a sell the close finish with a good bull bar, and you can take that buy for a scalp. But that's only about once a month. You get a lot of abrupt reversals, a lot of big bars. Here you get a big bear bar closing on its low, and it reversed up. And you get a couple bull bars, and it reverses down. Most traders should not be trading that. They will lose money. Let's say you see a trading range at the end of the day. You think it might be a final flag, maybe a triangle. Push up, push up, push up, push up. You get a reversal like that. You might take that for a scalp up, but chances are it's only going to be a scalp. And the market will probably end up continuing mostly sideways. A very tight bear channel. The first reversal up probably will be minor. A very strong bull bar. Some bulls might buy at the low of that bar, betting on a trading range. Not good trading for most traders. Also, a lot of times, when you have a setup like this, some traders will try to use a tight stop. They'll buy here, put a stop here. It's just a losing strategy. If you're using stops in a trading range at the end of the day, you have to use the widest stop because the market almost always triggers the nearby stop. So if a bull bought here and he gets this breakout and he decides, I don't want to risk much, I'll put my stop below here. He's just asking to get stopped out. You have to use the widest stop. If a bull buys there, and then he gets the reversal up, he still should use a widest stop because it might go above the bear bar and get one more small push down before going up. This is really difficult trading and most traders should not be taking this type of trading. Tight trading range, end of the day. Wait for tomorrow. The bear is selling at this high, betting on a double top. He sells below that bear bar. If he's taking that trade, he's going to use a wide stop, like a measured move up or above this high. Not simply above the sell signal bar high. Bull's betting that this is going to be a two-legged pullback and the bear reversal will fail, and this will be a trading range. If he's buying here, putting a stop below his buy signal bar, that's risky. Of all the setups here, this one is the most reasonable one for putting a stop below the low of the buy signal bar because you've got two legs down, a 50% pullback, and a bull trend. What about selling this high, betting on a reversal down? I would not do that that late in the day. We have a bull trend that could resume up to the end of the day. Probability's not high enough. The stops have to be far. The risk is great, so you have bad risk-reward, not enough time left for a swing, and therefore you've got little reward, you've got big risk, and the probability is low. That means you have both bad risk-reward and bad probability, whether you're entering with stops or limit orders, and very difficult to structure a profitable trade. Traders should always look for buy-the-close and sell-the-close trends at the end of the day. They typically start around 12.30 Pacific time, maybe 12.35. If they start too early, they usually do not make it to the end of the day, unless the day has been a strong trend day. For example, if it's a strong bull day, and you're starting to get a series of strong bull bars, even at 11 o'clock, it's reasonable to buy it and trade it like a swing trade. However, if the market's been mostly sideways, and you're getting a reversal or a breakout, and the breakout occurs too early, like with more than an hour left in the day, the trend probably will not last until the end of the day. Most buy-the-close finishes or sell-the-close finishes that begin after 12 or 12.30 are only going to last four, five, or six bars. The buy-the-close rallies always end at resistance. The sell-the-close bear trends always end at support. Usually, it's better not to enter after the fourth or fifth bar, because it's probably right at the target, and it's probably not going to go much further. If the market's in a tight trading range at the end of the day, in the final hour, especially the final 30 minutes, it's better not to trade. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of three videos on trading at the end of the day. I'm Al Brooks.