 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks training course. This is the first of four videos about losing because of mistakes. One of the common reasons that beginners lose is because of psychology and false beliefs. Most of the money that beginners lose is because they have incorrect beliefs about the market. They try to apply logic that works outside of trading into the trading world, and they discover that it doesn't work. That if you do what everybody else is doing, you're probably doing the wrong thing. I want to talk about common mistakes that beginners make and how to avoid them or how to fix them. Every trader, no matter how good, is going to lose money sometimes because good trades go bad. There's no 100% certain trade. I'm going to talk about those in the videos on losing when a good trade goes bad. That series of videos is shorter because traders lose much more money from mistakes than they do from good trades going bad. Beginners are ignorant. By ignorant, I don't mean a low IQ. For example, I'm ignorant of lots of things around the world, especially cultural things in countries where I have not visited. Ignorance simply means a lack of information. However, ignorance as a trader is a problem, but it's easy to fix by simply spending time and being open to ideas that you would not have otherwise considered. Common ignorant beliefs that lead to beginners losing money. Perfect trades. Beginners always believe there's some kind of a perfect setup and they get mad at me for not telling them my perfect setup. Perfect trades cannot exist. Every trade is a combination of risk, reward, and probability. And a perfect trade has great profit, great probability, and very little risk. That cannot exist. If a trade has really good risk-reward, it has low probability. If a trade has very high probability, it has very bad risk-reward. Usually, very low profit scalper. Another thing that you sometimes hear is noise. And noise is a terrible term. It implies that the market is behaving randomly. The market never behaves randomly. It may be making moves that are too small for you to trade, but somebody's trading them. For example, right here, you might not want to trade, but there are lots of computers trading, some for one or two tick or one or two pip scalps. But they're trading. High frequency trading firms are trading. And other institutions are simply trading because they've determined that this is a good price where they should be selling. Just because the market is making moves that look too small for you to make money does not mean that they are random. Everything that happens, happens for a reason. Another common false belief that beginners have is that either the bulls are making money or the bears are making money. Well, 90% of the time, both the bulls and the bears can make money if they use wide stops, scale in, and manage their trade appropriately. One of the problems that beginners often have is their focus on risk, and they ignore probability and reward. And that results in them sometimes picking bad entries. Beginners often have small accounts. And because they have small accounts, they don't want to lose their money. They equate losing the money in that account as the death of their dream of being a profitable trader. And therefore, they're desperate to not lose that money. Also, their spouses will get mad at them if they lose money. There is therefore a lot of pressure on them to focus on risk. And unfortunately, the result is all they see is risk. And to trade profitably, you also have to consider probability and reward and not simply risk. If you only look at one variable, you're probably going to lose money because you need the other two variables as well. For example, let's say a beginner sells here thinking that, oh, it's a pair of big bars. It shouldn't be doing that. We're reversing up and down, up and down, up and down. This should reverse down. I'm going to sell this betting that it's a bi-climax and it's going to reverse. If you took that short, at some point in the next bar, you're going to reverse. At some point in the next bar or two, he's going to decide that, well, maybe he bought a breakout that's going to succeed. However, a lot of times, beginners will hold on to the trade, hoping that this is the exception. He knows at this point or this point, the probability is we're going higher. But he'll hold knowing that nothing is 100%. And that means he has a real probability that the market will eventually go his way. He knows the probability is small, but it exists. It's real. And therefore, he'll ignore the reality that's in front of him, that he took a bad trade and he needs to get out. But he's hoping that the market will go his way. That's one of the other problems that beginners have. It's natural that people are hopeful. If you think about it, it's genetically bred into all of us to be hopeful. Thousands of years ago, if you did not have food in front of you and you were not hopeful that you could find a deer to shoot and feed your family, you'd just sit around and you would eventually go extinct. Whereas another person who was out there aggressively looking for food, confident and hoping that he'd find the food and he keeps persisting, he's going to survive. So being hopeful is a survival skill. However, it's horrible as a trader. You cannot make money hoping. You have to objectively evaluate what's going on. And if you fall back on your natural tendency to be hopeful, you will lose money. Buying here and watching the market go up, hoping that it will reverse, that is the wrong thing to do. Let's say a beginner buys here. He sees a bull trend, a pullback, a breakout of this bull flag and a pullback from the breakout. A good looking buy signal bar, a reasonable buy. However, he's only thinking about risk. He doesn't want to take a chance of losing any money and therefore he uses a tight stop right below the buy signal bar right here. That is wrong. If you're taking this trade, there's only one appropriate stop and that's down below the bottom of the original leg up. This is the major higher low. This is a minor higher low. The market could easily fall below this low in a two legged pullback, one pullback two, and it did. And simply become a high two bull flag. Two legs down, one pullback two, and the bull trend resumed. You cannot use a tight stop like that. The beginner took the good trade, bought above the bull bar, but used a bad stop and he got stopped out. It's a small loss, but if you do it two or three times in the course of a day, you're going to end up losing a lot of money. Another problem that beginners often have is they'll take a trade as a swing, but manage it as a scalp. The problem with that is if you're taking a swing trade, the probability of success, the probability of making a profitable swing is usually only about 40%. We have a very strong rally here. Traders buying for any reason and using the appropriate stop have maybe a 50 to 60% chance of making a profit. If a trader buys above this bull bar, he has to use the appropriate stop to get that 50 to 60% probability of success. This is a major high or low, a strong breakout to a new high. We have breakouts above minor highs here, but not strong breakouts lasting many bars. And therefore this is a minor higher low and the market could fall below it and still be in a strong bull trend. A beginner who took this buy above this bull bar and used this stop initially might become upset by the bad follow through here and decide that he doesn't want to risk the appropriate amount and he uses a tighter stop. Maybe below the bottom of the buy signal bar and gets out here. He ends up losing on a good trade simply because he did not use the appropriate stop. He decided to convert it into a scalp. But for a scalp, you probably need 70 or 80% probability of success. And this is not a 70 to 80% buy using that stop. The probability of making money, buying above this bull bar, getting filled here and putting a stop below here, I would say it's 50-50. And therefore, if you tighten your stop there, you're going to lose money. What happens sometimes is the beginner takes the trade and then let's say this is a five minute chart. He has five minutes, 10 minutes to think about it. And he begins to wonder, what if it goes against me? It could go all the way back down here and I don't want to risk that much. Well, if he is unwilling to risk this much, he cannot take that trade because this is where the appropriate stop goes. If he is entering as a swing, he has to be using the appropriate stop and he only gets out if his stop is hit or if the market clearly becomes bearish, which it did not. The opposite is another common problem that beginners have. They take a trade as a scalp and then they manage it as a swing trade, which means far too much risk for too little profit. Also, beginners should not be scalping because to scalp profitably, you have to be able to win 70 or 80% of the time and beginners simply cannot do that. The bulls have a breakout and the market went higher, another breakout, a pullback. Let's say a beginner buys this close, hoping that it's the start of another leg up. Maybe he bought it even though he knows it might be a double top and a wedge, one, two, three. And then the next bar is a bear reversal bar. The beginner who bought that close and sees this bar is now probably going to be upset. Let's say initially he was planning on putting a stop right below his buy signal bar, which is right here. And he was surprised by this bear bar and now he's frozen, he's paralyzed. And he's thinking that, well, if I take the loss and get out where my stop is hit, then I'll lose money. He knows that if he's scalping, he has to win most of the time and therefore he's afraid to take losses. So instead of exiting where he should exit, he'll use a wide stop and try to convert his scalp into a swing trade. But then he will not manage the swing trade correctly and he'll end up losing much more than he expected. When he bought that bull close, he knew the probability was not high, but he was hoping that the momentum up would lead to a profitable trade. And he was shocked to see that bear reversal bar. And once he saw it, he looked to the left and said, oh, maybe it's a double top. Maybe it's a wedge top. Maybe I took a bad trade. He decides that, well, swing traders usually can make money if they use wide stops and scale in. And therefore I'll use a wider stop. Maybe I'll put it below the bottom of the most recent bull leg. Even though this is really a minor higher low, the breakout does not have enough bars, did not go up high enough. And therefore it could simply be a bull leg in a tight trading range. The market could fall below it and the market could still remain always in long. The most recent major higher low is at this point. If a trader takes that buy on that close, he has to be using a stop down here. And he eventually finds himself stopped out at the bottom of the most recent bull leg. He ends up exiting with a loss that's four times bigger than the minimum scalp he was hoping to get when he bought that close. If you're losing four times bigger than what you're winning, you have to be right 80% of the time to break even. You probably have to be right better than 90% of the time to have a profitable strategy. And that's simply unrealistic. Very few really good traders win 90% of the time day in, day out, every day of the year. For a beginner to expect that, it's just not going to happen. And therefore his strategy is wrong. It's a losing strategy. If a beginner takes a trade as a scalp, he has to manage it as a scalp. This is a bad trade. It became clear when the bears had that reversal bar. The beginner should simply get out either below that bear bar or below the buy signal bar and take the loss. In fact, anytime a trader takes a trade and decides the trade is not good, he should get out immediately. And therefore a beginner who bought this bull close could get out at the close of this bear bar without waiting for the market to trade below the low of that bear bar. He had to know at the close of that bear bar that this was not a high probability bet that he'll make money. A more experienced trader would have realized that this was probably a buy vacuum test of that close. The bulls had a reasonably good bull trend here. Some are buying closes all the way up. Some became disappointed here, held long, betting that the sell-off would be a leg in the trading range and will get back up to that close. So they'll buy more lower. Those bulls who bought, used a wide stop and scaled in lower, are hoping the market will get back to their high close where they could sell. And that's what exactly happened here. Buy the close bulls bought more lower. And when they get back to their high close, their last entry price, they sold. And therefore this rally was probably a buy vacuum test of resistance at the high close and the high of the day and not the start of a new buy the close rally. Bulls were selling here. The bulls who bought here are relieved to be able to get out break even. And now you have bulls selling. That's not a good location for you to be buying. And it's also the third push up. One, pull back two, pull back three. And the pushes up are getting smaller. So it's a wedge top. Again, a bad location to be buying. If you look at a chart and you have 100 bars on the screen, only about 10% of them are in a very strong breakout, up or down. Here we have a reasonably strong breakout. It's about 10% of the bars on the screen. And when you have a very strong breakout, you have 60, 70, sometimes 80% chance of getting a measured move up based upon the bars in the breakout. For example, the open of the first bar to the close of the final strong bar in the breakout. Probably 70% chance the market's going to go up for a measured move. And you can see what happened when it got to that measured move target. The market stalled in part because bulls were taking partial profits. You can buy the close of any of these bars and take partial or full profits. At the measured move target. 70% chance it's going to get there. We have a close on the high, well above the neckline of this double bottom. And we have a follow through bar closing with a bull close as well. 70% chance we're going up for at least a second leg. Probably at least a measured move based upon the height of the strong part of the breakout. Reasonable to take profits. Partial profits, full profits at a measured move target based upon the height of that breakout. The actual risk was small. If you bought that close, the actual risk is one or two ticks or one or two pips, but very, very small. High probability, you can exit at simply one times actual risk if your profit is at least as big as a minimum scalp. Here, if the actual risk is only two ticks or two pips, one times actual risk is one tick or one pip, one or two. And that is not as big as a minimum scalp. So if you're trading the mini, you have to hold for at least four ticks, one point, a minimum scalp. And if you're trading the forex markets, you have to hold for at least 10 pips, a minimum scalp. However, if this measured move target is two to three times a minimum scalp, it's reasonable to hold for two to three times the size of a minimum scalp. I said that 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout. That means there's a high probability of some kind of a measured move in the direction of the breakout, here up. It also means that it's very difficult to make money selling when the market's in a strong breakout. If you sold this high, very difficult to make money. If you use a wide stop and scale in higher, you can avoid a loss, but very difficult to make money selling here and holding short as it's going up. Some bears who sold here would be disappointed by the extent of the rally. They'll sell more below a strong bear bar that is at least two to three times the size of a scalp higher. And then they'll either hold hoping the market gets back to their original entry price, getting out break even on their first sell and with a profit on their second sell. Or they might decide that 30 or 40 bars up is so extreme. Maybe it's better simply to get out between the two entry prices and get out break even on the trade. Small loss here, small profit here. Small loss here, small profit here. They sold this high. If they held through all of this, they could sell more below the spare bar, get filled here. And this is the average entry price. If they exit here, they lost money on their first sell. They made money on their second sell and they get out break even on their entire position. Or they could hold hoping it gets down here. If it makes a couple of reversals up with bull bars just above their target, they would get out on the reversal up, which would be around break even on the entire trade. They never fell below the first entry price. They therefore could not get out break even on their first entry. And they should just get out on a reversal up late in the day, late in the session. Can a beginner take that sell and sell more higher? Not realistic. And that's one of the problems that beginners have. They have the right idea. They know what they need to do to avoid a loss or to make money, but they don't have the ability to do it. In this case, can a beginner hold on to a short through a rally that lasts 30 or 40 bars? And is his account big enough so that he can sell more here? Probably not. It makes more sense for the beginner to get out of his short on the close of the second or third round. Or fourth bull bar. And then buy the bull flags in a bull trend. And he would more than make up for the small loss that he originally took. One of the main reasons why beginners lose money is because they don't know how to manage trades properly. To manage trades properly, you have to make decisions about the position size, the risk where your stop is, and the reward where to take profits. And if you make a mistake with any of those three things, you're probably going to lose money. I said only 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout. In other words, high probability of making money. Betting the trend will continue. 90% of the bars on any chart are either in a bull channel, a bear channel, or a trading range. Here we have all three. Every trading range has a leg up and a leg down. Here we have a bull channel and a bear channel and a trading range. This is typical. 90% of the bars are either in a bull channel, a bear channel, or a trading range. When that's the case, buying or selling at any instant within the range, you have between a 40% and 60% chance of making a profit. 40% to 60% chance that the market will soon go against you. On every bar on the chart, if you buy, you have between a 40% and 60% chance of making a profit. If you sell, there's between a 40% and 60% chance of making a loss. You do not have a 70% trade when the market's in a trading range. From the traders equation, you know that this is all you need to make money. As long as you have at least a 40% chance of making money, and you do buying and selling at any point in a channel or in a trading range, as long as you have at least a 40% chance of making money, you have a winning strategy if you exit with at least two times your actual risk. Beginners lose money mostly because of psychology and false beliefs. For example, they believe perfect trades exist. They also believe that the market often moves randomly with no rational trading going on behind it. And they also believe that low probability events can save them when they make bad decisions. They cannot. Once you see that you're wrong, you should get out. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of four videos on losing because of mistakes. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of four videos on losing because of mistakes.