 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on wedges. In this video, I'm going to be talking about wedges that break in the wrong direction. A failed wedge. We have a bull trend here and then a pullback and it might be a wedge. One, two, three, wedge bull flag and it tried to break to the upside and it tried to break to the upside again a second time. A wedge bear channel and therefore a bull flag and it's more likely to get a bull breakout. Instead, look what we got. We got a bear breakout here and an even stronger bear breakout here. So here we're getting a bear breakout below a bull flag. Whenever the market does something that seems unlikely, you should always expect an accelerated trend, a fast breakout. And if the breakout is strong, the odds are you'll get two legs down. One, pull back two. And whenever you're in the process of getting any kind of a breakout, you have to be thinking about a possible measured move. The top of the wedge is here. The bottom of the wedge is here. The bulls thought they were going to get a rally up to the top of the wedge. Instead, the bears got a breakout. So you have to be thinking that the bears will get the same distance that the bulls were hoping to get up here. A measured move based upon the height of the wedge. When the market falls for two legs and around a measured move down, the bears will begin to take profits. And the bulls will look to buy as well, thinking that the bears will take profits and you'll get at least a minor reversal. Here, the bulls tried to reverse up above a doji bar. It failed. The bears tried to resume down again, but then we got a bull inside bar and the bulls bought above that bar. And the bears gave up above that bar. You'd expect at least a couple legs sideways to up. We got a first leg up and then a triangle and then a second leg up. We have a fairly strong bear trend, very strong breakout, and then a weak looking rally. You can call it a bull channel. You can call it a wedge. There are three pushes up. One, two, three. Does not matter that the first push up began before the bear trend ended. That's very common for a reversal or a trading range to begin before a prior trend ends. Anyway, three pushes up. One, two, and three. Bull channel, bear flag. Odds are there'll be a bear breakout. However, sometimes you get a bull breakout above a bear flag. And when the breakout's strong, you're expecting at least a couple legs up. One, pull back two, and probably a measured move up. The bears are giving up. They're hoping for any kind of a pullback so that they can exit with a smaller loss. And the bulls who did not buy initially are hoping for any kind of pullback as well, because they are eager to buy. And the result is a second leg up. Again, the bears wanted a bear flag and a bear breakout, and at least a test of this low. And the bulls are expecting the same distance, but up once they got their breakout. And you can see the profit taking around the area of a measured move up. Aggressive bears will sell up there, taking a chance that enough bulls will take profits to get at least a minor reversal down, a profitable scalp. Here's a small wedge. Three pushes up. One, two, and three. A wedge bull channel. A wedge rally. You have to be thinking bear flag. And we've got a bull breakout. You have to expect two legs up. One, pull back, two. Bear trend. A weak rally. Three pushes up. One, two, three. So a wedge bear flag. Instead of a bear breakout, we have a bull breakout. The height of the wedge. Here's the beginning of the wedge. The top of the wedge is here or here. You can simply call it a trading range. A bull breakout above a trading range. In either case, whether you look at it as a wedge or a trading range, you have to be thinking that traders will take profits at around a measured move up. Also, a dramatic sell climax. Late in a bear trend. Probably an exhaustive move. And the market usually tries to get to the top of that sell climax bar. And then bulls take profits on their scalps and bears look to sell again. The market sold off quickly when it was at that price before. Maybe it will sell again at that same price. It's a small pattern, so it's probably a minor reversal. A minor reversal means usually a trading range or a larger bear flag. In which case, we did get a larger bear flag and we also got a trading range. Bulls buying this probably will scalp because this is not a credible major trend reversal. We did not have enough buying pressure. After this, that's a lot of buying. Then bulls might buy for a swing up. Higher or low. Higher or low. Major trend reversal. This, I think, is a special type of pattern and it's important. We have three pushes down. One, two, three. So you can call it a wedge bull flag. However, it's mostly horizontal. This breakout is a small breakout of here. This is a small breakout of that. So it's a small breakout of a small breakout. It's a wedge. Three pushes down. One, two, three. A wedge bull flag. Bull trend. Wedge bull flag. When you get three pushes down like that. Two lower lows. And the pattern is mostly horizontal. And the bull trend tries to resume. Yet it fails to break above the top. There's an increased chance that the breakout below the bottom will fall for a measured move down. In general, if you get a breakout below a small breakout of a small breakout. In other words, basically a horizontal wedge. 60% chance you'll get a measured move down. Usually two legs down. Maybe one, pull back two. Or other computers will say one, pull back two. Other computers will say one, pull back two. Trading range. A lot of bear bars. So good selling pressure. Lower highs. Lower lows. It's a wedge. But it's mostly horizontal and the breakouts were small. Special type of pattern. If you get a bull reversal and it fails to break to the upside. Be ready for a breakout below the bottom of the wedge and a measured move down. Higher probability of a measured move down from this type of wedge than from a break below other types of wedges. Small breakout here. And then a second small breakout. Small breakout of a small breakout. Three pushes down so it's a type of wedge bull flag. And when you start to get a strong breakout, the odds are 60% that you'll get a measured move down. A bear breakout below a wedge bull flag. Again, first leg, maybe second leg. Other computers will say this is the second leg. Measured move down based upon the height of the wedge. It's also a trading range. It fell for more than that. You can see some profit taking around a measured move down. And then it fell below it and more buying. The market's in a bull trend. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Bears will sell here. And now we have a double top lower high. They'll sell below that bear bar here. However, if the market breaks above the top of the wedge, bears will exit. In general, 75% chance you'll get a bear breakout below a bull channel or below a wedge top. And here we did. And we got two legs sideways to down. One, pull back two. Here the legs were sideways. Yet, we got a bull breakout above the top of the wedge. Whenever you have an obvious location for a stop, like above the top of a wedge, and the market breaks above it, hits the stop, 50-50 chance you're going to get a measured move up. 50-50 chance the breakout will fail. And the second top will lead to a reversal down. A wedge top, we tried to reverse. It failed. We're breaking to a new high. And now we're trying to reverse again a second time. Bears will either sell below this bar. Or, now we have a micro double top, they'll sell here. And now we have a rally to a lower high with a pair of bear bars closing near their lows. They'll sell here or here. Looking for a measured move down. Strong enough breakout. Second leg down likely. Rally to a lower high. Lower high. Major trend reversal. The breakout above the wedge is a surprise. Very often, you'll get a second leg up. Especially when the breakout has a pair of strong bull bars like this. Usually, you're going to get at least a small second leg up. And a lot of bears will wait until after the micro double top, and then they'll look to sell the reversal down. Whenever there's an obvious location for a stop. Wedge top up here. 50% chance the breakout will lead to a measured move up. 50% chance the market will try to top again and be successful. You could also view this as a larger wedge. 1, 2, and 3. Some bears know that the probability is 50% if the market gets above this high. It's 50% chance of a rally. And therefore, they're willing to take the chance. They do not exit. They'll use a wider stop. And a lot of them will sell more at this high, betting that the bull breakout will fail. They know 50% chance the bull breakout will fail. Wedge bottom. Three pushes down. 1, 2, 3. Fairly tight channel, so probably minor reversal. But pretty good buying pressure. You might get a couple legs sideways to up. An obvious location for a stop is below the bottom of this strong buy signal bar. In general, if the market hits a stop, a reasonable stop, an obvious stop, 50% chance the break below the buy signal bar will lead to a measured move down. 50% chance the breakout will fail. And you'll get a second reversal. Here we have a wedge bear channel. 75% chance bull breakout. Probably a couple legs sideways to up. In fact, here we did get two legs sideways. One pull back two. But the pull back fell below the bottom of the wedge. And a lot of bulls will have their stops there and they'll get out. Other bulls will say, 50-50 chance it'll reverse back up again. Which it did. So we have a wedge bottom. A bear breakout. 50-50 chance you'll get a swing down. 50-50 chance you'll get a reversal up. The bear trend resumed after just one leg up. You can argue double top bear flag. A bear inside bar. Some bears will take that short. Some bulls will get out there. But the bulls who relied on their stops, most will get out at that low. And they'll look to buy a reversal up. Micro double bottom. A bull bar. A lot will buy above that bull bar and get filled here. Bear breakout below the wedge. A lot of bulls will get out. Most bears will not sell. The sell off does not have much momentum. They'll wait to see if there's a big breakout bar. Not a lot of bears selling down here. It's reasonable to get out of longs and then buy the reversal up. It's also reasonable to look at this and say it's not a particularly strong sell off. We're probably already in a trading range. And therefore the break below that low will fail. In general, 50-50 chance the bear breakout will fail. I adjust that percentage depending on what's going on. And with this sell off not being particularly strong. Bear bar, doji. Bear bar, small bear bar. Bear bar, bull bar. I think there's higher than a 50-50 chance the bear breakout will reverse up. The breakout below the bottom is a surprise. And a possible second attempt to bottom. We tried to bottom here. It failed. We fell below that low. And now we got a micro double bottom. And the market is trying to bottom again. It's very common to have a wedge that tries to reverse. And we either get a double bottom or a slightly new low. And the market then tries to reverse a second time. So it's consecutive bottoms. A bottom attempt, a bear breakout, and then a second bottom attempt. And here we now have a higher low major trend reversal. Bulls will buy reversals up. They'll buy here. Fail breakout below the wedge. And a micro double bottom. They'll buy above that bull bar and get filled here. Or the higher low major trend reversal. Or a breakout here. We're trying to break out. We got a small bull flag. Two legs down. One and then two. Bulls will buy above that bar or above this bar. And they got a good breakout. Some bulls will look at this sell off and look at this bottom attempt and say, Pretty good bottom attempt. Pretty good buying pressure. Not all that strong. Bad follow through. A lack of consecutive bear bars. Probably more buyers than sellers below this low. And that's true. Some of these bulls will not exit here. They'll use a wide stop. Maybe based upon a measured move down. So stop somewhere down here. And they'll buy more. Either at this low or on the reversal up. Stop just below a measured move down. Either from the height of the wedge. Or from the height of this initial rally. I talked about failed wedges. And how if you have an obvious stop. And the wedge stop gets hit. 50% chance the breakout will lead to a measured move. 50% chance the breakout will fail. And you'll get a second attempt to reverse. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fifth and final video on wedges.