 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the third of five videos on wedges. I want to begin by making the point that a bad wedge is not a reversal setup. It's not going to lead to a reversal. Next, very often when you have a wedge, the reversal trend, the opposite trend, begins before the old trend ends. If you go from a bull trend to a bear trend or a bear trend to a bull trend, there's usually a transition during which time both trends are in existence. Finally, you can often enter earlier on a smaller timeframe chart, although most traders should stay with just one chart and not look at other charts. The market's breaking to the downside and again here and again here. And you can count three pushes down, one, two, three, and therefore a wedge. But a wedge alone has not a reason to buy in a strong bear trend. This bear channel is very tight. If you get a reversal, it's probably going to be minor. Bear trends are always forming wedge bottoms. One, two, three. One, two, three. One, two, three. One, two, three. And just because you can count three legs does not mean it's reasonable to expect a reversal. A tight bear channel like this is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. When the market's in a breakout, a bear breakout, you should only look to sell and do not look to buy. Any reversal like this or like that, it's profit taking by the bears who will be looking to sell again soon. It's not a realistic attempt at a bull trend. The reversals become bear flags, not bull trends. And look at this. We have a leg down and we have a reversal attempt, but the high did not go above the low of the breakout point. There's a gap. We have another bear breakout, another reversal attempt. Good looking bull bar, but it did not close the gap. This bear trend is forming gaps. When the legs do not overlap, when you're forming gaps like that, the bear trend is too strong to buy. Also, where are all the bull trend bars? Where is evidence that the bulls are strong? You have one bull trend bar here, but look at the follow through. And finally, the lines are not convergent. There's not a wedge shape. The stronger a bear trend is, the stronger the buy signal bar has to be to overcome the strength of the bear trend. And here, there are no really strong bull trend bars. There's a bull reversal bar here, a small one here. Does this small doji look big enough to reverse that bear trend? No. And the same with this. We have a good entry bar, but where is the follow through? We have a bull breakout and a very tight channel. And on a higher timeframe chart, this is also part of the breakout. This breakout would be continuing up on a higher timeframe chart. And when the market's in a tight channel like this, or in any kind of a breakout, only look to buy. Do not look to sell. Bull trends are always forming wedges. One, two, three, or one, two, three, one, two, three. You can count them any way you want. But all of those wedges are within tight bull channels. And therefore, the reversals are minor. Probably leading to a bull flag and a resumption of the bull trend, not a reversal. Remember my 80% rule. If you're in a strong bull trend, 80% of reversal attempts fail and become bull flags. And the bear scalpers keep losing money. They keep selling money. They keep selling. And they keep selling. But we're just going to see the trend. We're going to see the trend. And the bear scalpers keep losing money. They keep selling. They sell a failed breakout. They sell a final flag reversal. They sell a wedge top. Another wedge top. Another wedge top. Another wedge top. And they keep losing money. In any trend, traders are always counting reversals. Reversal down, so the end of leg one. Another reversal down, end of leg two. And now we have a third leg and a pullback. End of leg three. Whenever traders are counting bars or counting legs, and they see a strong breakout like this, it's usually better to start the count over again. Instead of calling this bar three, traders should call this bar one. Simply Depression blank and point three. It is probably a second and working adjusted complex situation. In general, you want toourse between the three pushed left and two on where you want the trade movement. That's the平ial pyramid of trade government. Because the projected side triangle tightness. That's operatinggrills all same and the pricing range. So, the time we use, trading grâce to theNET. In all times the trading Kurti center corner, it's important to show how thick it's facing Australia is open and not positioned. Again, once the trading side triangle. If the trading side triangle trees should not be the only difference of difficult times when to areas this difference, the trading area between its jump única and the Cities. Even tradingReels ourbrahimovic Pero strong. When traders are counting legs and they see three pushes each up, to be about the same between point 1 and point 2 as it is between point 2 and point 3. If there's too big a difference between the spacing between point 1 and 2 and then point 2 and 3, computers tend to ignore this as a channel. Here there are 21 bars between 1 and 2, only 7 bars between 2 and 3. That is getting to be a little too asymmetrical and traders tend to view this less as a wedge and more as a bull channel with more to go. This strong leg up, a lot of traders would restart the count and say this is point 1, this is point 2. Strong bull breakout, start the count over. This then is point 1, point 2, point 3. We have three pushes down, 1, 2, 3, convergent lines and a gap, this high in the breakout point. That is a problem. Whenever there's a gap, even though this bar pulled back above the low of this bar, this is the bottom of the first push down and we did not go above that low. Whenever there's a gap in your wedge, the channel down is usually too tight to begin looking for a reversal. Wedges usually need stairs. They need overlapping with the pullback from the breakout going above the breakout point of the prior leg down. As a sign of buying pressure, you could also call it a wedge 1, 2, 3, but same problem. No overlap and therefore it's probably not a reliable wedge bottom. 1, 2, 3, and then start the count over. Strong breakout. 1, 2, 3. Still forming gaps. That means the channel down is too tight and the reversal probably will be minor. The limit order bulls buying below bars are losing money. If the limit order bulls are losing money, the stop order bulls buying above bars probably will lose money as well. Therefore, the bulls are too weak to be looking for them to create a reversal up other than a minor reversal. The channel is very tight. It's not broad. No consecutive big bull trend bars. Not enough buying pressure for reversal. And therefore, a reversal up is probably going to lead to either a bear flag and another leg down or a training range. And here it did both tight training range and a new low. So, sometimes the legs in a wedge are subtle. And sometimes it's only a bull bar followed by a bear bar. This is a nested wedge. We have one and then a reversal down two and a reversal down three. But the third leg subdivided into a smaller wedge. A bull bar and then a doji. A bull bar and then a bear bar. A pair of bull bars and then a bear bar. On a smaller time frame chart, it would be a wedge. On this chart, it's inferred. Whenever you see a bull bar and then a bear bar or a doji bar, that is a first leg. Another bull bar and then a bear bar, that is a second leg. Very tight bull channel here. And the entire channel is tight. And therefore, the first reversal down probably is going to be minor, leading either to a bull flag or a trading range. Here we got a 15 bar tight trading range. TTR, tight trading range. Within it, there's a small wedge, three pushes up. Bull, bear. Bull, doji. And then a third push. You often get a lower high major trend reversal when there's a tight trading range after a bull trend. It usually comes as some kind of a double top. You could say this bar is a double top with that bar. The probability, like most major trend reversals, is low. Maybe 40% chance you get a swing down. But if you wait for the breakout and then sell, the probability of lower prices and making money is higher. Selling late, the stop is further away, so the risk is greater. Selling early, the stop is close, the risk is less, but the probability is less as well. Both are acceptable. So, here we have a wedge bottom. One, two, three. And the minimum that traders need to see to conclude it's a wedge is a bear bar followed by a bull bar. So, one, pull back. And then two, pull back. And then three. However, there's a smaller wedge as well. A bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, doji and bull bar. And then bear bar, bull bar. This is also a smaller wedge. One, two, three. So, different ways to draw it. One, two, three. And the bulls got a higher low major trend reversal. They have a bear trend, possible final flag, lower low, major trend reversal. Not much of a strong breakup, but we had several strong legs up. Traders will look for the bear breakout below this trading range to fail. This trading range then will probably be the final bear flag. You can call this a final flag reversal or a lower low, major trend reversal. You could say bear trend, bull breakout by going sideways. And then resumption of the bear trend that failed. Good reversal up. And then a spike and channel down. Spike, first push, second push, third push. With a good buy signal bar. I think it's important to realize that most reversals begin before the prior trend ends. There's a transition. Here we have a bull trend and a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down. One, two, three. But look at this push down. This bear channel, a small bear trend, began before the bull trend ended. And the same here. We have a push down. A new high and then second and third push down. You can call this a triangle or a wedge. This is the first leg down of this wedge channel, this triangle. Yet it occurred before the bull trend ended. The same here. This wedge bear flag, bear channel, began before the bull trend ended. And that makes sense. Usually a bull trend does not go into a bear trend. There's usually some kind of a transition. And the transition often is the first leg of the bear trend begins before the bull trend ends. The same here. First leg down and what became a wedge bull flag came before the bull trend ended. And the same here. You could say that the bull flag began here. One, pull back two. I think it's more realistic to say this was the start of the bear trend. And there was a transition in here where the bear trend was beginning and the bull trend had not yet ended. The same with here. You could say it's a high two buy. Leg one, pull back leg two. I think it's probably more of a wedge bull flag. And the bear trend and bull trend coexisted. There was a transition. The bear trend began before the bull trend ended. And the bull trend was still in effect even though the wedge bear channel had already started. This is how I would label it. One, two, three. And the same here. I think this is part of the correction even though the bull trend has not yet ended. In any case, whether you call it a high two, one, two, or a wedge, one, two, three, you're going to buy the reversal up. And the same with this as well. Legs can be small, sometimes as small as a single bar. You can look at a smaller time frame chart, but it's usually not worth doing. You can just infer what's going on by the appearance of what's going on on the five minute chart. Here we have a leg that is only a single bear bar. And it's followed by a bull bar. So to me, that's a leg down and it ended with this bull bar. Here we have a few bars down and ended with a bull bar. Here a few bars down ended with a bull bar. Here we have a tail. The market traded down and traded up on a smaller time frame chart. That is a small leg one. We have a bear bar followed by a bull bar. This is a leg two. We have a bear bar followed by a bull bar. That means it's a third reversal up. This is a small wedge bull flag on a smaller time frame chart. You'd see it, but you can infer it simply by looking at this. And this is all that you need to see. The same here. A doji bar went down and up. We went down and up. And then we clearly went down and up. This is a type of a wedge pullback, even though it does not have a wedge shape. And the same here. We have a bull breakout and then a bear inside bar. That could be the first push of a wedge bull flag. In fact, that's how I would label this. You could call it simply a high two, leg one, pullback, leg two. I would call it a wedge bull flag. One, two, three. Where the market transitioned here, it was still in a bull trend and it was in the start of a bear trend. The important thing is to realize it's a bull flag. So you want to buy the reversal up. Whether you call it a high two or a wedge, you want to buy the reversal up in every instance. A wedge bear flag, it's a small bull trend. And it can begin while the bear is still underway. This is usually a transition. The first push up can be a lower high in the bear trend, followed by a new low, but still part of the bull channel, the bear flag. For example here, strong reversal up, yet the bear trend continued. A second push up here, third push up here. You can call this a wedge bear flag, even though the bear flag began before the bear trend ended. The same with here. A transition, we're in a bear trend, yet we're starting to have a bull trend before the bear trend ended. There's usually overlap between the bear trend and the bull trend. There's a time when both are in effect. Here, I think this is the start of the bull trend, a bull trend bear flag. Every bear flag is a small bull trend, yet the bear trend still is working lower. You can call this two legs up, one, two, or you can say maybe it's a wedge bear flag where the bull trend began here, and then two, and then three. That's how I would label this. I would label this a wedge. I don't have the line drawn in here, but if you did draw it in, this would become a wedge-shaped pattern. Again, the rally, a wedge rally, it's a small bull trend, I think began here, while the bear trend was still in effect. This is a transition from bear to bull, and there's a period when both are still operating. The bull trend is beginning, the bear trend is still continuing, and this bear leg is part of the bull channel. The same here. As you can see, it's pretty common. A reversal up. The bear trend is continuing, but this reversal up is the first push up in a wedge rally. The key point, you're in a bear trend, you're looking to sell a reversal down from every rally, betting that the rallies are minor, and therefore bear flags, and that the bear trend will resume. So you sell below the low of that third push up. You can enter earlier on the smaller timeframe chart. I think traders will make more money if they just trade the chart that's in front of them, and not look at other charts. This is the Euro versus the Yen, a monthly chart. Clearly a wedge bottom. One, two, three, or three. And then a good IOI buy setup here. Some traders will anticipate this, the reversal. They'll see the wedge, and they'll start looking at a weekly chart, or a daily chart, or even a 60-minute chart, or a five-minute chart for a reversal that could lead to a swing trade up. A lot of times, the first attempt will fail. Here we have a lower low. We have a wedge, one, two, three. Nested maybe, one, or one, and then two, and three. A reasonable buy. Fairly tight channel, weak buy signal bar. This reversal probably is not going to be successful. But this one, we have a bear breakout, a good reversal bar. Another bear breakout, another good reversal bar. It has a higher probability of success. If you're trading the monthly chart, you buy above the high of this bull bar. And here's your fill price. 99.18. Again, you could draw the wedge, one, two, three, or one, two, and then three. Some computers do it one way. Others will do it the other way. This is a daily chart of that same reversal. If you were buying on the monthly chart, this is where you would be buying. 99.18. On the other hand, if you looked at that monthly chart and you saw the wedge starting to form, you could look at a daily chart and try to enter earlier. Like, for example, here, 95.21 or here, 96.91. This is the euro versus the dollar on a 60 minute chart. And you can see maybe we're forming a wedge. Three pushes, one, two, and it's starting to push up here, three. You got a wedge bull flag, three pushes down, one, two, three. If you're anticipating a continuation of the bull trend, then you might start looking for bull flags. If you see a first push and a second push down, this is strong enough so that we probably are going to get one more push down here. You can take the trade on the 60 minute chart, buying above the high of this bar. Or you can look at a smaller timeframe chart for an earlier reversal. If you buy the wedge bull flag here, your entry is here, 1.0795. And this is the five minute chart. This would be the 60 minute entry. Right there, 1.0795. However, on the 60 minute chart, you saw the possibility of a wedge bull flag. You could look at a five minute chart for an earlier entry. For example, here or here, a microdouble bottom or a triangle, one, two, three. The entry price is 1.0780, about 15 pips lower than the entry on the 60 minute chart. I began by talking about how bad wedges are not reversal setups. Bear trends are always forming wedge bottoms that are bad and the market keeps going lower. Bull trends are always forming wedges that are bad and the market keeps going higher. Bear. A bad wedge is one where the legs do not overlap. It's not a stairs pattern. There are open gaps or the channel is too tight to expect a major reversal. I then moved on to talk about how new trends begin often before the old trend ends. There's usually a transition from one trend to the other. And finally, I talked about how traders sometimes like to enter early. If traders are trading a very high time frame chart, monthly chart, weekly chart, 60 minute chart, they will often look at a smaller time frame chart for an earlier entry. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on wedges. We'll be taking one later. Thank you first. This may be social media. This appears all its popularity of Few expertise on Twitter beads the next one. This is the third of five videos on Twitter, pä warning if you believe you, you can go on to some key details. Part count after TikTok stores doing more marketplace. This is the third of five videos for partner barely even on Twitter. It's also the third of six videos on Twitter. You can also link those videos, Furthermore, discover the겠어Wars, the CAINs, receiver km, page, page, page. I ask for local needs that you include all elements of the audio while play単告 mientras you play here. hustlingё've the templatera has led. It's the third of the sensor esfuerzo button to open up the radar. You can't tell your strengthogenAut veut!