 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of six videos on trading ranges. I'll begin by talking about the vacuum effect, how the market gets drawn towards support and resistance. Next, I'll talk about perverse logic. Oftentimes there are very strong breakouts, but they're at support or resistance, and it's easier to make money betting that the breakouts will fail. The market is rallying strongly here, but then look at this. It reverses abruptly. Even a very strong bull trend can reverse suddenly. If this is a five minute chart and the market did this late in the day like this, you turn the news on, the news would say the market sold off because a certain news event happened. Remember, they believe news causes everything. They believe everything is caused by news. They have no concept of support and resistance and markets probing for fair price. News is the center of their life. They know they have millions of people watching them. They conclude that everyone believes that news controls everything. And in fact, that's silly. It's just totally wrong. Markets behave because traders are in search of a fair price. And sometimes they have to go too far to find out how far far enough is. And they'll reverse abruptly. There's always news happening 24 hours a day. And if some news event happens during this abrupt reversal, TV will say the news caused the reversal. When in fact, it had nothing to do with the reversal. The reversal occurred because the market raced up to test resistance and decided that there were not enough buyers there at that price. And the market had to come down quickly to find buyers. News reporters, they do not understand support and resistance. And they do not understand how markets work. Even financial reporters on financial news networks. Was this reversal down caused because of news? Well, if you turn on television, they'll say it was. If you ask me, it was due to support and resistance. We had the first leg up and then we had a breakout and a pullback. And a measured move up is right there. When the market started to get near the target, everyone knew it would reach the target. So bears stopped selling. Bulls started buying aggressively. And then once it got to the target, the bulls took profits. And the bears decided, okay, it's at a good price to sell. And both bulls and bears selling, the market reversed down. Look to the left. This strong rally tested the top of the sell climax. And tested near the top of what could be a trading range. Another reason for the market to reverse down. The market's constantly trying to find the best price. The price where most trading will take place. If the market goes up too high, not enough traders will be willing to buy. The volume will disappear. If it goes down too low, not enough traders willing to sell. So the market's constantly probing up and down and up and down. Trying to find the price where most trading will take place. Once the market gets near a fair price, or what the market thinks is a fair price, the legs tend to get smaller and the bars tend to get smaller. There's a consensus that this general area is a good price to buy and a good price to sell. And eventually there are countless variables involved in pricing. And they're all changing constantly. And at some point, the fair price is no longer fair. It's either too high or too low. And the market has to quickly move to another fair price. You get a breakout. And the market's constantly probing up and down to find the edges of the range. Here, the range converged into the apex of a triangle. And the market then broke to the downside. At some point, the market decided that the price was too high. And it had to go lower to find enough buyers to keep the trading going. I've been talking about intraday charts. But the market's probing to find the best price on all time frames. This is a monthly chart of the S&P cash index. It turned down from this high. And then it rallied from approximately that low and approximately a 50% pullback. And then it rallied strongly. And what happened once it got to this high? It sold off. It decided again that this is too high a price. The bulls who bought up here were very disappointed by the size of the sell-off. And they were happy to have the market come back to their original price. So that they could get out break even. And that's a common cause of double tops. And the opposite is true here. The bears saw this collapse. Some bears sold down here. They were very disappointed by this rally. And they were very happy to have the market come back to their price. So those bears could buy back their shorts break even. So you have bears buying and bulls buying. And the market goes up again. And the market goes up again. Fundamentals are changing constantly. And there are countless variables. Nobody knows all of the variables. And the result is the range is constantly changing. The range of a fair price is constantly changing. However, it's always reversing at some kind of support or resistance. And we had this big collapse in 2009. And look where it reversed up. If you drew a trend line across these lows, it broke right below that trend line and reversed up. Although I don't have it shown, this is the 1987 crash. It also reversed up from a trend line across those lows. The market probed down to support. Also support of a prior low. And found buyers just below and then reversed up. This is the Euro versus the Yen on a monthly chart. The market is probing constantly on all time frames to find what the best price is. Any time frame can be the most important time frame at any given instant. Even if you're looking at a five minute or one minute chart. Sometimes the monthly support and resistance can be important. The fundamentals are constantly changing. There are countless variables. It's impossible to know all of the variables. The result is the fair price is constantly changing as well. We have a very strong bear breakout on the monthly chart. Yet the market reversed up here. Why? At the bottom of a channel. And it's a wedge channel. I could draw a trend line across the top. But this is a wedge bottom with a decent looking buy signal bar. It's also reversing up near the 2000 low. This low is also a test of the low back in 2000. Support. We're racing up strongly. Very, very strongly. Yet it reversed down sharply. Was that due to some news report? No, of course not. It does not matter what time frame this is. It could be a one minute chart. It could be a weekly chart or a monthly chart. The market raced up strongly and reversed down because of technical factors, not because of news. There's always news taking place all of the time. And news is one of many, many variables. But a more important variable is support and resistance. But you have to be able to find the support and resistance to anticipate a reversal. The bulls had a weak rally here. It looks like a bear flag. First leg up. And then we got this very strong second leg up. And a lot of the bulls thought, hey, this is the start of a breakout into a bull trend. So we get a bull breakout, a pullback, and then a channel and much higher prices. However, whenever the market has a lot of trading range price action like this, it frequently has a very strong second leg, making traders believe that the trading range is ending and the market is converting into a breakout and then a strong bull trend. A second leg trap is a second leg in a trading range or a broad channel that reverses instead of having an additional leg up. A lot of traders look at this and say, wow, that's so strong. Chances are the first reversal down will fail and we'll get one more leg up. But second leg traps, no. You get a strong breakout and then an abrupt reversal. Two legs down, one pullback, two. Second leg stronger than the first. It trapped traders. Two legs up, one pullback, two. It reversed down. Strong second leg, testing the top of a trading range. Strong second leg up. It looks like it might break out and instead reverse down. This bar closed above the high of this bar. It looks like it might even have closed above the high of the past 20 bars. Traders are thinking, ah, we've got a breakout and we'll have a bull trend. No. It's a second leg trap and a trading range. Two legs down, one pullback, two. The second leg very, very strong. Closed below the low of the past 30 or 40 bars. It looks like it should be the start of a bear trend. Traders are expecting a second leg down from here after the breakout. Instead, they get a reversal up. Why is that? Because it's still probably part of the trading range. Two legs down, second leg looks strong enough for the start of a trend, yet it reverses. Remember my 80% rule? 80% of breakout attempts of trading ranges fail. They reverse. First leg up. Extremely strong second leg up. Close above the high of the past 40 or 50 bars. Yet, look at the follow through. A big bear reversal bar. It trapped bulls into buying high, expecting this to be the start of a bull trend. 80% of breakout attempts fail. The market is always constantly drawn to magnets, support and resistance. And just like with any other magnet, the closer it gets, the faster it moves. Magnets. Support and resistance. I use the term magnet to mean support and resistance. There are many types. Trend lines, measured moves, prior high, prior low. A trend line drawn across here, reversed down at a trend line. Trend line drawn across here, reverses down. A trend channel line at the bottom of a bull flag, broke below it, reversed up. Same here. Trend line drawn across these highs, it reversed down. Prior highs and lows. The market tested this high, reversed down. Tested this high, reversed down. Tested this low. The bears bought back their shorts, the bulls bought. Tested this low. The bears bought back their shorts, the bulls bought. And the market reversed up. Measured move targets. We reversed up here. Went up for a measured move. We have a trading range. We broke to the downside. Reversed up from around a measured move. We have a gap. This high, that low. Possible measuring gap. Well, it turned out to be a measuring gap. Once the market gets close to the top or the bottom of the trading range, it's within the gravitational field of the edge of the range. And it usually cannot escape that gravitational pull until it hits the target. And then the magnet suddenly gets turned off. And like with any magnet, the closer it gets, the stronger the magnetic pull and the faster the market moves. Races down to the bottom of the range. Reverses up. Races down below support. Reverses down. Races up strongly to resistance. Reverses down. Incredibly strong move up. But simply a magnetic pull up to support of the prior high. And then it reverses down. Races down. Once the market reaches the magnet, the support or the resistance, the magnetism disappears. And the market usually reverses and tests the opposite support or resistance. The market deciding that it's gone too far down and needs to probe up. The market's deciding it's gone too far up, it has to probe down. It's constantly searching for the best price. And it usually has to go too far to determine how far, far enough is. When there's a reversal, there's usually more than one type of support or resistance operating on the market. Here we have an expanding triangle. At the bottom and at the top. And a breakout above a prior high. And breakout below a prior low. Usually measured move targets as well. And the lower low. And the lower low. Take a look right here. This blue box. Right above support. Both the bulls and the bears see the bottom. And they know it's support. So what takes place? As the market's falling, everyone knows the market's probably going to get to support. Maybe a little bit lower. So what will the institutions do? If you're a bullish institution, do you want to be buying here when you know it's going to get here or lower? No, the bulls stop buying. If you're a bearish algorithm like a high frequency trading firm and you see the market falling quickly with a magnet just below, you're going to sell. So you get bears selling and bulls not buying. And what's the result? The market has to go lower to find buyers. The bears expect the market to get down to support, maybe below. So why would they buy back their shorts here? They know it's going to go lower. So they wait to buy. The bears are not buying. The bulls are not buying. And the bears are selling. And the result is an imbalance and the market quickly gets down to support. With both bulls and bears believing the market's going a little bit lower, it doesn't make sense for either the bulls or the bears to buy here. So nobody's buying and the market quickly gets down to support. The result often is one or two very big trend bars breaking through support. So it's getting vacuumed down to support. It's getting sucked down below support. But then what happens? Look at this. The market suddenly reverses. Now why would that be? We're down to support. And the bulls decide this is a good price to buy. The market bought at this price here and at this price here. We're in that general area now. So the bulls suddenly appear and start buying again. The bears also know the market reversed up here and reversed up here and here. And they buy as well. They're buying to take profits. And the bulls are buying to put on long positions. Bidding that support will hold. The market usually falls a little bit below support when the market's in a trading range. And then reverses. And the opposite takes place at the top of a trading range. Right below a prior high. The market's going up quickly. And here. Do you think the bears are going to start selling here? No. They believe it's going to get up to that high. So the bears stop selling. There's an absence of bears. And the bulls now see a lot of momentum up. They know there's a high probability that the market's going higher. They buy even more aggressively. So you have bulls buying aggressively. And bears not selling at all. And the result is you get a very strong move up to resistance. There's no one left to sell right below resistance. Because both bulls and bears believe the market's going to go up at least to resistance. And maybe a little bit higher. Bears aren't going to sell here when they know they can sell here. Bears stop selling until it gets above resistance. And then they sell. They sell heavily and relentlessly. Especially once they see the market starting to turn down. They're confident that this is the temporary high. And the bulls expect the same. They see the same thing. They see it's at the top of a trading range. And they see a gift. A very big, sudden, high price. What a great opportunity to take profits. So the bulls sell as well. So you have bulls and bears both selling once the market goes up into the sell zone. Around the area of a prior high or any other kind of resistance. And you get an abrupt reversal. A beginner does not understand what's going on. And all he sees is this bar. Wow, what a big bar. Big bull bar. This is going to be the start of a bull trend. He ignores all of this to the left. And he ignores all the resistance. All he sees is that big bar. And he's going to buy up here. Betting on a successful bull breakout. And a few minutes later, he sees this. And thinks, oh my gosh, that's not fair. How did that happen? But it happens all the time. Beginners are always selling low. Betting on a successful bear breakout. And beginners are also always buying high. Betting on successful bull breakouts. They're always expecting these strong bars to be followed by a second leg. But in a trading range, this is the second leg. And they get trapped. So leg one, pull back leg two. And then no more additional legs. The market just reverses. It gets vacuumed up to resistance. It gets vacuumed down to support. And then everybody buys bulls and bears. Everyone sells bulls and bears. And you get a reversal instead of a successful breakout. Another reason why beginners buy up here is they think that it could be a huge bull trend. Yet they see all of these reversals. They're afraid that this might reverse as well. And they want as minimum risk as possible. So they're buying as soon as they are convinced the breakout is underway. They don't wait for follow through. They want to enter early. And the same down here. They see it breaking out. And they want to reduce risk. They're afraid of losing their account. They usually have a small account size. So they sell. Hoping that this is the start of a huge breakout. But they totally ignore probability. Look to the left. How likely is it that a bull breakout is going to succeed? How likely is it that a bear breakout is going to succeed? And that's one of the problems with beginners. All they see is risk. And they want to reduce risk. So they want to enter as early as possible. Even if the probability of making money is very small. The beginner sells this little pullback. Thinking it's a bear flag. Expecting a second leg down. And this is the entire second leg. Just a little bit down. Does not even go below the prior low. The beginner buys this very strong bull close. Or maybe he'll buy here. Hoping for a second leg up. Thinking that this is so strong. The market certainly has to have higher prices. And the beginner cannot believe that the pullback just keeps growing and growing and growing. He sells here. A pullback. Or maybe it'll turn down again. A low 2. A low 1. A low 2. And his set keeps going up and up and up. He buys here. Expecting a second leg up after the strong breakout. And then he starts to see it pull back. And the pullback just keeps growing and growing and growing. And he ends up selling down here at the bottom of a trading range. And the beginner who sold here. Probably buys back here. At the top of the trading range. He ends up selling low. And buying high. Selling low. Both to put on a short. And to sell out of losing longs. And up here. He's buying high. Either to buy back his losing short. Or to buy. Hoping for a successful breakout. In either case. He's doing the exact opposite. Of what professionals are doing. He'll get out of his shorts up here. If he sold here. If he bought here. He'll get out of his longs down here. He's getting out of his shorts. Exactly where the professionals are selling. He's getting out of his longs. Exactly where the professionals are buying. He's doing the exact opposite. Of what a trading range tells you. What you should be doing. In a trading range. You want to buy low. Not sell low. You want to sell high. Not buy high. The market just repeatedly gets vacuumed down to the bottom. And vacuumed up to the top. And then it repeats the process in the opposite direction. Experienced traders understand that. When the market's in a trading range. You've got to be thinking of opposite logic. Perverse logic. You have to bet breakouts will fail. This is unlike in a trend. Where you assume breakouts will succeed. Is this a trend? Or is this a trading range? It's clearly a trading range. I think this is true. What I'm about to say. Although I have no proof of it. If I were writing computer algorithms. This is what I would do. If I'm a bearish firm. I want to sell high. But I want to convince traders. That the market's going to go a lot higher. So they'll have a lot of bulls getting along at the top. I believe some bear firms. Who are looking to sell. Will buy here. For a scalp. Trying to get the momentum strongly up. And then they'll quickly sell. Once they've trapped other firms into buying too high. And that's part of the reason why we get a buy climax. They buy as it's going up. Hoping to get it as overbought as possible. Expecting a very sharp reversal down. And the opposite is true at the low. I think some bullish firms are selling here. Trying to get it as oversold as possible. And then they quickly buy back their shorts. Once they trap a lot of other institutions into selling low. And then they get long as well. Bears buying just below the top. To make bulls believe the breakout will succeed. They want to trap bulls into buying too high. And then the bulls will have to sell with a loss on the reversal down. I don't know how important this is. I do think it was much more important 20 or 30 years ago. But I do think it's a component of what takes place at reversals. These effects like this. Bulls selling at the top. Bears buying at the bottom. It's mostly computers. Traders are not fast enough to make these decisions. And to carry out those trades. And then do an opposite trade. And again, I don't know how important it is. But I do think it's one of the factors that creates these climaxes. Again, as the market is going down to support. Part of this is probably due to perverse logic. You have bull firms wanting the market to get as oversold as it possibly can be. Expecting a very big reversal. So some bull firms are probably selling. Expecting to buy back quickly. And buy heavily and create a big reversal up. The bulls benefit by having the sell climax be as extreme as possible. Because it increases the probability of a reversal. And it increases the probability that the reversal will be big. They want to do whatever they can to make the market be as extremely oversold as possible. And that includes some firm selling. Expecting a strong reversal. And then planning on buying heavily on the reversal up. And then planning on buying heavily on the market. These bulls are selling, trying to accelerate the market downward. Trying to entice as many bears into selling as possible. They want the bears to bet on a breakout. These bull firms are doing it because they're confident that there will be enough buying either from them or from other firms to create a reversal and end the bear breakout. They want to trap the bears into selling too low. And then those bears will have to buy back with a loss once the reversal up begins. Here and then here. Breakout attempt looks strong, but it fails. No follow through. You get a reversal. Bull breakout attempt looks strong. But look at the follow through. A big bear reversal bar. The trapped bears exit with a loss. And they'll probably not sell again until much higher. And up here. The trapped bulls are exiting with a loss. And they're not going to buy again until the market is much lower. At the bottom. Strong bulls buy back their shorts. And they reverse too long. Long. These bulls will be buying from bears who are expecting follow through selling and a measure move down. These bears sold expected a measuring gap and a measure move down. They're selling and the bulls are buying from them. And eventually those bears give up. And if they are able to create a strong reversal up, a lot of times they'll be able to reverse all the way up to the top of the trading range, which they did here. Remember, the bulls want the market to be as oversold and climactic as possible. And they want to create as big a bear bar as possible to trap as many bears as possible. And that increases the chances that they will get a very strong snap back, a very strong climactic reversal up. They're trying to encourage bears into selling low. They want the bears to believe there'll be a breakout and a measured move down. And then they trap the bears. And the bears have to give up. And they exit with a loss. And they'll probably not sell again until the market gets much higher. And they're trying to prevent pullbacks. On the way up, the bulls are trying to prevent pullbacks. They want to force the bears into buying back as high as possible. When this is starting to go up, there are some bears who are still short. The bulls are buying aggressively, trying to prevent a pullback, to make the bears have to buy back at a very high price. And that high price will be where the bulls will be selling, taking profits. At the top, you have bears that are buying, trying to create as extreme a buy climax as possible, to increase the chances that the reversal down will be very abrupt and go very far. Once it gets to their sell zone, they sell out of their longs and they reverse to short. And they'll be selling to bulls who see the strong breakout and who are hoping it's the start of a strong bull trend. They're expecting a measured move up, maybe based upon the height of the trading range. And instead, the market starts to reverse down quickly. And those bulls are trapped and they have to sell out at a loss. These bears that are buying with the intention of creating a buy climax are going to sell strong enough to reverse the market down. One firm alone cannot do it, but if enough firms are doing this, confident that the market will stay within the trading range, you do get the reversal down. And as I said, when you have a trading range and you get a breakout attempt, 80% of the time, the breakout will fail and the market will reverse. And that's true. Even when the breakout is strong like this or like this, it's still probably going to fail. Most firms expect it. And once the market gets high enough, a lot of firms will start to sell, overwhelming the bulls who are buying, hoping for a successful breakout. The bears at the top, they want to sell as high as possible. They want the market as overbought as possible, because that has a better chance of creating a big reversal down. The bears want a big bull bar. They're expecting the market to fail on its breakout attempt, but they want it to be as strong a bull bar as possible to trap as many bulls as possible into buying high, because then those bulls will have to sell and that will add to the selling and lower prices. Those trap bulls who bought here and who sold here with a loss, do you think they're going to buy again right here? No. The reversal big like that is going to be at least a second leg down before the bulls will buy again. And that reduces the chance of any rally and it increases the probability that the bears will make a bigger profit. The bears who sold up here or up here, they want to sell aggressively and strongly. They want to drive the market down very far so that there will not be a pullback until the market has gone a long way. They want to force the bulls into selling out of their longs at a very low price. So if the bears can make the sell off drop very, very far before there's a pullback, chances are the bulls will sell out of their longs with a loss and not buy again. And the bears who did not sell initially are eager to sell even at a low price like this and they'll sell. Bulls and bears selling, the result is a second leg down. It's an advantage for the institutions that sell up here to drive it down as far and fast as possible because that increases the chances that you'll have trapped bulls who have to sell and you have bears who are trapped out and who are eager to sell. And the first reversal up will fail and you'll get a second leg down. I began by talking about the vacuum effect. When the market approaches support and resistance, it often accelerates and then once it reaches the support or resistance or goes a little bit beyond it, it then reverses. And then I talked some about perverse logic that there are some bull firms who are selling near the lower trading range, trying to create as big a sell climax as possible and then they buy. And then near the top, you have bear firms buying near the top, trying to make the market as overbought as possible, resulting in as dramatic a buy climax as possible. And then they sell and ride the trend down. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of six videos on trading ranges. And that really quickly turns out which of the big hit Amen to the center. Christ An intensityPS Indeed in Zeit 게션, the next step. Redarnya Rush Time And that really goes by the way you're going to take a look at your competition and you're going to take a look at it and get it. Okay, let's watch out the 30 in ponto and look for another recap. Wasn't it a result? Repeat yes, that's what I would recommend. So, you think that it is a huge run for you.