 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability. Perfect trades cannot exist. However, good trades exist and they are common. Traders need to be able to structure trades where they have a mathematical advantage and edge. I'm going to talk about the mathematical basis of trades and that's the Trader's Equation. Traders always need an edge when they are structuring a trade. That's a mathematical advantage. That means that if they take enough of a particular type of trade, they will have a profit over time. For example, we have a Buy Climax and a Lower High. It looks like a reversal. Traders might short below the low of that bar. At this point, it's not a high probability trade. Traders might place a stop either above this bar or above the top of the Buy Climax. The risk is not big relative to the reward. A lot of beginners like low risk trades. That's their greatest concern. They don't want to lose money. Their account size is small. They worked hard to build their account. And they know if they lose their account, their dream of becoming a professional trader might disappear. In general, beginners like low risk trades. However, when the risk is small, so is the probability of profit. As long as the risk and profit and reward make sense, the trade is still a very profitable trade. But you need to balance out the risk, reward, and probability. That means you have to structure a trade that has a good balance. Some traders prefer higher probability trades. And that means they wait for strong breakouts. For example, waiting to sell once you have a pair of consecutive Big Bear trend bars and selling that close or selling this small double top bear flag below that low is a higher probability trade. But the stop is up here. The stop is further away, so the risk is greater. Also, you're entering later in the trade. There's less profit remaining. The risk reward of entering here is not as good as the risk reward of entering here. However, the probability that you'll make money is greater here than it is here. That's the trade-off. Some traders prefer small risk. In other words, they want a very good risk reward equation. And they enter here where they have smaller risk. Other trades prefer to win frequently. And they go for high probability trades. However, that means that the risk reward ratio is worse. It usually means that the stop is further away. Over the short run, a day or two or three, trading is a zero sum game. Over the long run, years, it's not. But as a trader, you're trading either for a day, a week, or a month. You're trying to take money from very smart people. And it's difficult to do. However, that challenge is part of the fun. And if you structure your trades properly and manage them properly, you'll have a very good chance of consistently making money. An edge, a mathematical advantage, is usually fleeting and small. Even the best traders do not have a very high probability of making a big profit all the time. Any advantage that they have is small. However, if they're consistent, and they're capable of consistently trading properly, that small mathematical advantage can result in very big profits over time. High-frequency trading firms, HFT, use algorithms for only days to weeks at a time before switching to a different type of algorithm. Here, we have a very tight trading range. Traders look to buy low, sell high, and scalp. Everybody wants a perfect trade. However, a perfect trade cannot exist because before long, everyone would discover it, and no one would be willing to take the other side of the trade. And the trade would stop working. Here's a trading range. High-frequency trading firms would detect that the market is starting to enter a trading range. And they would start looking to buy low, and scalp, and sell high, and scalp. Because that is what is most profitable when the market is behaving like this. On the other hand, trading ranges eventually break out, as this one did here. We have a strong bear breakout and a strong follow-through bar. The market is probably going to fall for some kind of a measured move, and traders selling here have a high probability of making money. The traders who bought low, for example traders who had limit orders to buy here, now are going to lose money. The algorithms and the style of trading that was profitable when the market was doing that are no longer profitable once the market begins to trend. In this case, the bears will not be able to sell high because the market is not high, it's only going down. And bulls buying low are going to have a hard time making money if the channel down is tight. Instead of buying low, selling high, and scalping, traders should only sell, and they should swing trade. Bear breakout. Consecutive bear bars, both closing below the low of the trading range. High probability the market will fall for some kind of a measured move. Maybe based on the height of the range. Maybe based upon the height of the breakout. The open of this bar to the close of that bar, measured move down. And then there will be other measured moves as the channel unfolds. This is a spike and then a pullback. And that pullback is the start of a channel. The market became a spike and channel bear trend. And it's very tight. And when it's tight, it's impossible for the bulls to make money. And therefore, traders should not buy. And when the channel is tight, it's impossible for the bulls to make money. And therefore, traders should not buy. Traders looking to sell high cannot sell high because the market is only pulling back for a bar or two. It never gets high. Traders have to sell for other reasons like blow bars, sell bull closes, or sell breakouts to new lows. Instead of buying low, selling high, you cannot buy at all. Instead of selling high, you have to sell low. Breakouts of bear flags, attempts to reverse up. In any case, you'll be selling near the bottom of the market. Betting that it will go lower. And that is the correct strategy. A perfect trade has a high probability of a big reward with very little risk. That cannot exist. Because there would be nobody to take the other side of the trade. If you have a very high probability of a big reward with very little risk, no institution is going to take the other side. Because if your trade is perfectly good for you, it's perfectly bad for him. He has a low probability of making only a small reward with a very big risk. You cannot get all three variables, probability, reward, and risk on your side. You can usually get one. Often you can get two, but you can never get all three. Usually the trade-off is between high probability versus risk reward. Some traders want high risk reward that has a lower probability of making money. Other traders want high probability, but that usually comes with a worse risk reward profile. Usually bigger risk, a stop further away. Again, perfect trades cannot exist because someone has to take the other side of the trade, and no firm is going to take a trade with very little probability of making money, and they only stand to gain a small reward, and the risk is big. Any trade that approaches perfection will be traded very quickly, and the opportunity will not last long. Trading range setups are never all that clear, so the probability is not all that high. But the risk is small. Strong bear breakout. The probability is high that the market is going down further. However, the risk is usually bigger. The stop is further away. Breakout. High probability, worse risk reward. Trading range. Low probability, but better risk reward. Bear channel. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. The probability is still good, but it's not quite as good as selling during the breakout. Again, the stop when you're in a trend is usually further away than it would be within a trading range. So the risk is greater when you're trading in a trend, but the probability of making money is greater as well. The market is in a cycle. It's in a trading range, and then it breaks out and enters a trend. The trend eventually becomes a trading range again, and then it decides whether to reverse into an opposite trend, or to resume the trend, break below the trading range. Traders should not expect any strategy to last for too long because the market will constantly alternate between a trading range and a trend. The trend can be up or down. And when you have a trading range, the breakout can be down or up. Once too many computers begin to detect what the market is doing, the market usually does something else. For example, if it's in a trading range, it eventually breaks out. And if everybody starts trend trading, eventually no one will take the other side of the trade and the market starts to go sideways. Breakouts are brief. On any chart, on any timeframe, only about 5 to 10% of the bars on the chart are in strong breakouts. For example, here. Strong breakout. Another strong breakout here. Lots of breakouts here, but they all failed. But in general, 5 to 10% of the bars on the chart are in a successful breakout. So the opportunity to make money during a breakout is brief. And once you're in a channel, it eventually will start flattening out and evolve into a trading range, waiting for the next breakout up or down. Entering a trade during a strong breakout is as close as you get to a perfect trade. However, the opportunity does not last long. Traders who are selling as this is falling, if they're sensing that the market is falling fast and likely to break out successfully, they have a brief opportunity to sell here or here, where the stop is not very far away. The risk is not great and the probability of profit is high and the potential for reward is big, but that is only a very brief opportunity. Once everyone sees the opportunity, you get some profit taking and the market then gets a pullback and the strong breakout gets replaced by some uncertainty and eventually a channel. Institutions detect the quick momentum down and they're selling quickly and that is creating the breakout. As I said, it's a brief opportunity for a trade that is as close as you can get to perfection. It does not last long. As the breakout grows, the risk increases and all of a sudden it becomes less perfect. There's also a reasonable chance that a breakout will fail. In general, if you have a strong breakout like this, there's a 40% chance that it will fail and reverse back up. 60% chance it'll go down at least for a measured move. That's when the breakout is strong like this. We have a breakout, another breakout bar, both closing below the trading range and then no bull bar for the follow through. We have doji's here. So weak reversal attempt. This is a 60% trade, 60% chance it's going to fall for at least a measured move. Any time a trade approaches perfection, everyone sees it and everyone starts trading in that direction. Early in this breakout, everyone is selling, knowing that probability is high of making money and the stop is not far away. The bar is big because everyone sees this as potentially a perfect trade. There is a risk factor and part of it is time. The stop might not be far away, but you have the risk of making mistakes in your decision, assessing whether or not the breakout will be successful. And a lot of traders are uncomfortable making those quick decisions and placing those trades. And therefore they'll wait to see a couple strong closes and then sell a close down here. Knowing that it's less perfect, stop is now further away, but you still have a high probability of a profit. When a trade is close to perfect, you get a huge trend bar because everybody is quickly taking the trade. And as the bar becomes big, the stop gets further away and that increases the risk. And if you enter down here, not only is the stop further away, but there's less reward remaining in the trade. So the risk reward ratio is becoming worse. No matter how good you are, your edge, your mathematical advantage is always going to be small. The key to making money consistently is learning how to become consistently good. No one's going to give you money. Trading is always going to be hard, but that's part of the fun, the challenge. Traders always wonder if they have to be perfect. They do not have to be perfect. All they have to do is trade well consistently. Learn how to structure trades where there's a mathematical advantage. Use appropriate stops and exits and manage the trades correctly. Whenever a trader takes a trade, he's always thinking, am I going to make money if I take this trade? At least subconsciously, traders are only going to take a trade if they believe the probability of making money times the size of the reward is significantly greater than the chance of losing money times the risk. Traders only take a trade if they believe the probability of making money times the potential reward is significantly greater than the probability of losing money times the risk. Traders always got better than their advantage that our ROI. In the subconscious balance, desem 지�ш empresas are probably going to take up a tradewow. I'd love to argue that $2,000 5 times the risk i'd be Można coins to Pharmac transcript. Power to get this massive thrust from demand. When you take it all up toob squad, you can anticipate Canadians can do their the ROKHO. Traders and we always get to work halfway through an Detailsly Effect. Let's consider donating absgers could be the costs of off to Sayle Trials, to Statehp and then it'synen a long ratio of Rise, Sponsor and Treaships which are consecutively used to Four N popped of trade because of the possibility from paper and overhoffounders, trends, the probability is less. In a trading range, for example, it sometimes is only 40% unless you use a wide stop and scale in. This is the trader's equation. If it's positive, then it makes mathematical sense to take the trade. You can even lose 60% of the time and still make money if the risk-reward ratio is good enough to offset that low probability. Here's the E-mini, a five-minute chart, and I want to talk about 10 theoretical trades. Assume you take 10 trades and your profit target is four points and you use a stop that's two points away. So your reward is twice as big as your risk. Four is twice as big as two. And let's say you only win 40% of the trades. So of the 10 trades, you only win four times and six times you do not win. Those six times might be small losses, they might be small wins, some of them will hit the stop, but none will be more than two points because you have a two-point stop. For example, let's say you sell below this bear inside bar and you sell here. You place a limit order to take profits at four points and you get filled here. You have a stop two points above, you're risking two points and you made your four points at the bottom of this red box. Let's say you see the reversal, you think of it as a wedge and then a pretty good reversal, you think it's going higher and you buy on a stop above this bull pullback bar here and you get filled there. Again, you place a stop two points down, you place a limit order to take profits four points up and you get filled right there. This is another profitable trade. You made four points, you risked two points, your stop was not hit. And let's say you sold here, took profits here, sold here, take four points profit here, here, here. On the way up, you bought above this inside bar, took profits here, you bought above here, took profits here. Many profitable four point trades. On the other hand, if you bought here, hoping for a reversal up, it did not quite make four points. You sold on the reversal down, thinking it's a minor reversal and the bear trend would probably try to resume, you made less than four points. And let's say you see this as a potential double bottom and you bought above this bull bar. You put your stop either below the low of the signal bar or maybe the low of the bear trend, or you just rely on your two point stop. Let's say you get stopped out here for a two point loss. And then here as well, you got a high two bull flag, you buy, and then you get a bear reversal bar. You either exit below that bar or you rely on your two point stop. You lost two points here, you lost two points here, you lost two points there. We have a strong trend down, strong trend up, it's easier to make money. Reasonable swing trades should win 40% or more of the time. And because of the strong trend, we have 10 trades, seven of them were winners, and only three of them were losers. On the other hand, let's say instead of 70% win, let's say only four were winners. So you had four trades, each making four points, your total profit on the winning trades is 16 points. And let's say you had six losers that hit your stop, you would lose 12 points. Your net profit would be 16 minus 12, four points, greater than zero, you have a positive traders equation. You have 40% winners times four points, that is greater than 60% losers times two points. That's a positive traders equation. So the strategy that you are employing here makes sense mathematically. And over time, you have a very good chance of consistently making money. The math is actually better than what I just described. Because if you're swing trading, you're not going to be taking profits at four points, you'll hold on to the trade until it no longer makes sense to hold on to it. For example, until there's an opposite signal or until the end of the day. Your winners, then many of them will be much more than four points. Also, 60% of the time, you're not making four points. That does not mean you're losing two points on each of those six losing trades out of 10. Some of the trades will be two point losers, some will be one point losers, some will be one point winners, some will be two point winners. Those 60% of trades when you're not making your profit target, balance each other out. Some are small winners, some are small losers, you're not going to have 60% of the time hitting your two point stop. I want to give an example using the Euro versus the dollar Forex market. Here's a five minute chart, and I want to talk about five possible trades. Assume you're using a profit target of 40 pips and a protective stop of 20 pips. And let's say you only win 40% of the time, 40% of five trades, that means you're winning two trades out of the five. We have a strong bear trend, and let's say you sold here, and you placed a limit order to buy back with a 40 pip profit, and you had to stop 20 pips up. Here, the market quickly went down to your target, and you'd exit with a 40 pip profit at the bottom of this red box. We have a very strong reversal up after three pushes down, one, two, three, probably, we'll try to get a second leg up. Let's say you place a buy stop order above the high of this bull bar, and you place a stop 20 pips down. The market turned back down, but it did not quite reach a 20 pip stop. It resumed up for a second leg, and you would have been filled with your limit order, 40 pips above your entry. Another profitable trade. You buy here, stop just down here. This did not reach it, and you exit up here with 40 pips profit. The bears made 40 pips here, the bulls made 20 pips here, and again the bulls made 20 pips here. A high two bull flag, two legs down, a test of the top of this range, and it went up 40 pips before the stop was hit. On the other hand, let's say you sold below this reversal bar. The bulls tried to create a bull trend, and the market reversed back down. However, the market reversed up from a new low. You had a profit target down here to take profits at 40 pips. You had a stop up there, 20 pips above. You sold here. It did not hit your stop. However, this reversal is a good enough reason to exit. You'd exit above the high of this bull bar, which is maybe a pip or two profit from this short. And then again here, let's say you bought above this bar, a wedge, one, two, three, decent bull bar, and you put your stop below the low of the day, below here. You were quickly stopped out. It's less than a 20 pip loss, but you still were stopped out. Reasonable swing trades should win 40 or more percent of the time. Here we have a strong trend down and a strong trend up. You probably have better than a 40% chance of winning with your swing trades. We have three trades that reached a swing target of twice as big as the risk. They made 40 pips while risking 20 pips, and you had two trades where you did not make your 40 pips. Here you might have made a pip or two, and here you may have lost about 15 pips or so. Two losing trades, three winning trades. Let's assume instead that you only had two winning trades. You had two winners times 40 pips, the 80 pips total profit. You had three losers. Let's say your losers all hit the protective stop and you lost 20 pips on each. Three losers times 20 pips. Your total loss is 60 pips. Your net profit is 80 minus 60, 20 pips. That means that the probability of winning, here it turned out to be 40%, times the reward is greater than the probability of losing, here 60%, times the risk. That is a positive trader's equation. And that means this type of strategy is mathematically profitable. You have an edge. And if you employ the strategy over time, you have a good chance of consistently being profitable. The math is actually better than that because some of the winners are more than 40 pips. If you're swing trading, you won't necessarily take profits here. You may swing part of it until the trend is no longer in effect until the end of the session, until there's a clear opposite signal. So some of the winners would actually be more than 40 pips. 60% of the time you do not make a swing profit. You do not make 40 pips, but that does not mean your stop gets hit during those 60% of the trades. Some of them are small losers. Some of them are 20 pip losses. Your stop gets hit and some of them are small winners. And the 60% of the time when you do not make your 40 pip profit, those times tend to balance each other out. Some small winners, some small losers. I began by talking about perfect trades and a mathematical advantage. Perfect trades cannot exist. However, if you structure your trades properly, you can have a mathematical advantage, an edge. And then I moved on to talk about the trader's equation. If the probability of making money times your potential reward is significantly greater than the probability of losing money times your risk, you have a positive trader's equation and the trade that you just structured has a mathematical advantage. You have a good chance of making money. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on the the Trader's equation and probability. You