 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on scalping. I want to begin by talking about ticks and how traders can use them to find scalps. And then I want to move on to tick divergences, which is a particular way to use ticks to find scalps. I have a one minute chart of the E-mini and I have the tick chart down below, a one minute chart of the ticks. The red line is minus a thousand. The top red line is plus a thousand. And then the blue lines are plus seven hundred and minus seven hundred. New York Stock Exchange has about three thousand stocks on the exchange. If the current trade of a stock is above the last trade, that adds plus one to the ticks. If the current trade is the same as the last trade, it adds zero to the ticks. If the stock is now trading below its last trade, it adds minus one to the ticks. The current tick value on the chart below is the sum of all the ticks for the three thousand or so stocks. If the ticks equal one thousand, here slightly above one thousand, then a thousand more stocks went up than down on the last trade. For example, let's say right here. At that instant, six hundred stocks were unchanged. Their last trade was the same as the trade before. And twenty two hundred stocks went up. The current trade is above the prior trade. And twelve hundred stocks traded below their last price. Then the value of the ticks is zero plus twenty two hundred minus twelve hundred. And you get a one thousand tick reading. And the opposite took place down here, where you get a minus one thousand tick reading. You can see the low of that bar was minus one thousand and nine. That means there were one thousand and nine more stocks on the New York Stock Exchange that went down on their last trade compared to those that went up. The high of this bar on the tick chart is one thousand and fifty two. Therefore, the difference between the number of stocks that went up on their last trade compared to the number of stocks that went down on the last trade was one thousand and fifty two. That means most stocks are going up. And it makes sense that if most stocks are going up, then the indices would go up. And the E-mini is the futures contract based upon the S&P 500 contract. Not the New York Stock Exchange, but a very high degree of correlation. If the E-mini is sideways to up and then has a bear breakout, traders look for the first reading below minus seven hundred or even below a thousand as a sign that the momentum down is strong. Most stocks are going down. When that's the case, usually the first reversal up will fail and the market will go at least a little bit lower. Very strong bear breakout. Even without looking at the ticks, you know the odds are high the first reversal up will fail and lead to a new low. Traders who watch the ticks, when they see a new bear breakout and a tick reading below a thousand, some of them will sell instantly at the market thinking that the market will go at least a little bit lower. It's a reasonable scalp trade. They might sell the close of the next bar. They might sell at the market as soon as the tick reading hit minus one thousand. They might sell above a reversal bar, betting that the first reversal up will fail and you'll have to have a higher low in ticks and a lower low in price before there's much chance of a bounce. In the E-mini, it's a high probability trade for a one point scalp. If a trader sold that close and scaled in, sold more one point higher, his stop would be all the way up here. He's never going to let that stop get hit. He would exit long before then. However, he would sell the close, sell more higher, and then possibly look to get out break even on his first entry and then with a one point scalp on his second entry. Or he could exit at the low thinking that the odds were high. The low in ticks will not be the low in price. The low price will go down a little bit more. Here, ticks fell almost to the blue line, minus 700, but we're getting near the end of the day. Remember, this is a one minute chart and you can see it's already 1250 Pacific time, so there's not much trading left to the day. And therefore, selling with limit orders on a rally is a risky thing to do. When the bears see this very strong reading in ticks during an initial bear breakout, the shard of a possible bear trend, they'll sell for any reason. They'll sell the close of the bar that hit minus 1000. They'll sell a reversal up. Here we got a small double top bear flag. This high and then that high. So low one, low two. Sell that for a scalp. We have a strong rally up. But again, it's a one minute chart. First pullback to the moving average. Traders will look to sell. After six bull bars, they might take the second entry down, which would be to sell below this bear bar closing on its low. Again, this is a one minute chart and most traders should not be trading the one minute chart. However, these are the kinds of things that scalpers will do when they see a dramatic drop in ticks or a dramatic rally in ticks. They'll do the opposite up here, expecting the high in ticks will not be the final high in price. Remember, these are scalps. So traders are looking to exit with a one point profit. The range here, while it looks big, is really not all that big. This is a one minute chart and this is about a six point range. And therefore scalping from one point is reasonable. If the market is sideways to down, but then has a bull breakout, traders look for the first tick reading above 700, the blue line, or above 1000. And once they see it, they expect the market to go a little bit higher. Here, you can see we touched the blue line, 700 in ticks, and we're in a bear trend. We're getting a pretty good reversal. Again, one minute chart. It's a scalp. A lot of traders will buy at the market or they'll buy a one point pullback on the first touch of plus 700 on a reversal up, expecting that the market will go at least high enough up for a scalp. Let's say you buy the close of that bar and at first hit or tick reading of 700. You can buy more lower, betting that the odds are high, you'll be able to make a profit. So for example, you buy a one point pullback from the first entry, and then you get out break even on your first entry and then with a one point scalp on your second entry. You can buy for any reason. You can buy at the close of the bar that hit 1000. You can buy below its low, a bull bar, a bad sell. You can buy one point down. You can buy at a pullback to the one minute moving average. Your risk is at least below here. So you're risking three or four points to make a one point scalp. If you manage the trade properly and are willing to scale in and are quick to decide that the trade is bad, it's a profitable strategy. There were many ifs in that sentence. Some traders will exit with a one point scalp, wherever they bought, below bars, above bars. Very strong bull breakout. Ticks hit 1000. They went above 1000. And therefore, a new high in ticks and a new extreme in ticks. Very bullish. Most stocks are going up. Traders will buy at the market. They'll buy a reversal down. They'll buy a resumption up, betting that the final price will be above the price when ticks hit 1000. Usually the high in ticks does not correspond to the final high in price. Usually price goes higher after you get an extreme reading of ticks early in a trend. Traders will therefore bet the first reversal down will fail. They'll buy below the bull bar. They'll buy above the high one. We have a little pullback. They'll look to buy at the moving average. They'll buy the breakout of this small bull flag. Bull breakout. Small pullback. It's a bull flag. And then look to take profits about a point higher. If they buy up here, their stop is probably going to be below the bottom of this very strong bull breakout. It should not fall below here if, in fact, the trade is good. First pullback to the moving average, a double bottom bull flag, a breakout. Again, this is a one minute chart and most traders should not be doing this. However, scalpers, experienced scalpers do trade like this. They look for all kinds of little tricks on the tick chart to help them find trades on the E-mini chart. Now, here again, we're hitting a thousand ticks. The first time during a rally that has gone on for 30, 40, 50 bars. And look at the rally. It's a stair-step pattern. We have a breakout, a pullback below the breakout. A new high, and a pullback below the breakout. A new high, we're probably going to pull back below the breakout. And we're also probably near the potential top of a trading range. This looks like a bull leg in a trading range. When that's the case, when you get an extreme reading in ticks occurring late in a trend, you have to be careful that it might be an exhaustive end of the trend and not the start of an even stronger part of the trend. And again, subjective, but in general, if you're looking to buy ticks, you want to buy them early in a trend, not late in a trend. Late in a trend, it's more likely to be a climactic end of the trend than the start of an even stronger leg up. We're stair-stepping up. We go above this high, we pull back. Above this high, we pull back. Above this double top, we pull back. Well, what do you think is going to happen when we get above this high and this high? We're probably going to pull back. With this many stairs, chances are the market's going to enter a trading range fairly soon or possibly even a bear trend. And therefore, buying a new high reading in ticks is a low probability bet. A possible blow off in ticks, a possible blow off in the stock market. Traders will wait to see if the bears get stronger. For example, like a very tight bear channel, in which case they'll stop looking to buy. You want high tick readings early in a reversal or early in a trend. Those have a high probability of follow-through trading. Again, we have a one-minute e-mini chart, a one-minute tick chart. And look at this. The ticks hit about minus 1,000. I don't know if it's quite there, but very close to it on this bar. It's also a fourth new low in ticks. Ticks made a new low here, a new low here, new low here, new low here. This is a possible climactic end of the trend. Usually the low value in ticks is not the final low value in price. Here we have ticks almost to 1,000, minus 1,000. And here's the price. Usually that will not be the end of the trend. Usually you'll get at least a little bit lower price and a higher value in ticks. You get some kind of divergence, a tick divergence, and it leads to at least a bounce. Again, a low tick reading, minus 1,000, late in a trend, especially a trend that's stair-stepping down either in price or in ticks. There's a higher chance that it is a climactic end of the trend rather than an acceleration into an even stronger trend. I mentioned tick divergences a moment ago. I'm going to talk a little bit more about that now. Stock market is rallying, meaning one minute chart. We have a new high in price, but look at this. Ticks hit 1,000 over here. And we have a new high in price and a lower high in ticks. Therefore, fewer stocks are going up compared to the number of stocks that went up over here, yet the price is going higher. And then here we have a strong breakout to a new high. And look at ticks. We have fewer stocks trading above their last trade at this higher high in price than what we had over here. This is a tick divergence, and it increases the chances that the bull trend will either turn into a bear trend or a trading range very soon. The high in ticks the first time you hit 1,000, usually not the end of the move. We went up a little bit more, and then we went up more again 30 bars later. The bulls will buy the first high in ticks, which will be over here. Or they'll buy the reversal down, betting that the first reversal down will fail. The traders who did buy this breakout, some of them will buy more lower. If they bought this, they might buy more lower as well. They always want the second entry to be at least as big as a scalp below their first entry, and then they look to get out at their first entry. For example, if you bought that high close, and you bought more down here, this entry, you want it to be at least a point below that, so that when it gets back to that high close, you get out with a one point scalp here, and you can get out break even here. The Amni sold off at this price. It pulled back around that price again, and it might pull back when it's up at that price a third time. And we're getting a tick divergence. You can see at this price, we have ticks here, and the ticks here later are lower. So we have a tick divergence from this high to that high, ticks getting lower. And we have a tick divergence from this high to that high. So ticks getting lower. That increases the chances that this is near the end of the move, and that the rally might soon be converting into either a trading range or a bear trend. I had a friend years ago, I traded with him for a year or two in a chat room, and this is what he did all day long. He would simply look at a one minute chart of the E-mini versus ticks and look for one or two tick divergence a day. And he was trading 25 contracts looking for a one point scalp. I have no idea whether or not he was profitable. However, the way he talked made me believe that he was profitable, that he was picking the right trades to fade. We have a bull trend on the one minute chart, and it's pretty strong right here. Therefore, only experts should ever consider selling a tick divergence in a reasonably strong bull trend. It's just too easy to make mistakes. And remember, this is a one minute chart, and most traders should not be trading a one minute chart. However, as I said, experienced traders are looking for scallops, and some of them do trade one minute tick divergences and one minute tick extremes. Ticks are going down over here. And then traders will expect that this bear reversal, 20 bars or so, is probably enough so that we're converting it into a trading range. This looks like trading range price action. This looks like trading range price action. And traders, therefore, will look to sell at a prior high, especially when the ticks are at a lower high. They'll sell either with a limit order at that prior high or on a reversal down. Here we have an IOI and a bear bar closing on its low. Some traders will sell on a stop below that bear bar. And then try to exit one or two points down. Tick divergence. Here we've got a very strong sell climax. And the low in ticks is about minus 1000. That's probably not going to be the low in price. However, if we make a low in price and ticks do not make a new low, that increases the chances that we'll get a reversal, at least into a trading range. The first time down ticks to minus 1000 in a new bear breakout. Traders will sell for any reason. They'll sell bear closes. They'll sell above bars. They'll sell reversals down. Looking for at least a scalp. Expecting an E-mini to make at least one more new low. And then they try to exit at the prior low or with a 1.7. Or with a 1 point scalp. If the E-mini is at a confluence of support. For example, you don't see the bars to the left here. But if this is the 5 minute moving average and a wedge bottom on the 5 minute chart. A 50% pullback of a rally. If there are many things going on here that increase the probability that bulls will come in. If you then also see a tick divergence. This could be the end of the pullback. And it could lead to a resumption of the rally that you see on the higher timeframe chart. When that happens. Bulls will start buying at prior lows in price. Expecting that the tick divergence will lead to at least a bounce and possibly a resumption of the bull trend on the higher timeframe chart. Again, you have a very strong bear breakout. Buying in a very strong bear trend based upon anything. A tick divergence is a very difficult way to make a living. Only expert traders should consider doing this. There are many decisions that a trader has to make when trading a one minute chart. In a tick divergence. Most beginners cannot make the decisions accurately fast enough in the time that they have on a one minute chart. And therefore it's a dangerous strategy. If an expert trader did buy the reversal up, he could scalp, get out with a one point scalp, or he could hold for a swing trade. Especially if this is at a support area on a higher timeframe chart like the five minute chart. Here are the markets in a bear trend. Some traders will watch tick rallies when the E-mini is in a bear trend. Expecting the tick rallies to correspond to a bear flag on the one minute chart. And therefore they'll look to sell. For example, strong bull close above zero. And ticks probably is not going to lead to a tick reversal. If the ticks have been mostly negative. Sometimes they'll sell with limit orders at prior highs in ticks. We have ticks going above this high. And as soon as that happens, an E-mini trader might sell at the market. Looking for at least a little bit lower in price. Again, a new high in ticks, but in a bear trend. So as soon as it happens, some traders might sell at the market. Expecting that they'll be able to make at least a scalp. Ticks going above the prior high in ticks. Traders sell at the market. Looking for a scalp down. This high in ticks is above that high in ticks. And traders will therefore look to sell at the market. When this bar goes above the high of that tick bar. Looking for at least a one point scalp. We have a wedge in price. One, two, three. A wedge bottom. And ticks are making a higher low. We're getting a tick divergence. A new low in price. A higher low in ticks. Often leads to a transition into a trading range. And then look what's taking place over here. The market's sideways in a bear trend. After about 20 or 30 bars, the probability of trend reversal up. Is about the same as trend resumption down. But take a look at what took place here. Most of the ticks are above zero. That increases the chances that we'll get a bull breakout. In any case, because the market's in a trading range. Bulls will look to buy whenever the ticks get near prior lows. Or slightly below prior lows. Here you can see we're right at that low. And we got a little bounce. Bulls might buy here. Risk two or three points. And try to get a one point scalp. Again, ticks are at this prior low. Bulls will look to buy. Now we're starting to get a bull breakout. And we're getting a big bear bar. Again, ticks are at the prior low in ticks. Every time the market has been here. The selling has stopped. We're getting a little bit of a bounce. Bulls will buy this little tail at the prior low in ticks. Because every time the market gets to this tick level. We've been getting a bounce in ticks. And usually corresponds to a bounce in price. It can be the start of the swing. But I'm talking about scalps. And most traders taking that kind of a trade will scalp. I mentioned that we had a bear trend. We're sideways for about 30 bars, maybe 40 bars. But look at ticks during that time. Ticks are mostly above zero. Yet price is below the moving average. And we're in a bear trend. That increases the chances that we're going to get a bull breakout. I talked about using ticks to find different scalps. When trading, using a 1-minute chart of tick and the E-mini. Some traders use a 5-minute chart of E-mini and a 5-minute chart of ticks. And then our number up from time frame. As a trade internet editor on this side. Forlay. I saw preparing to see on top printed on the election and see that E-mini can see. If we had confidence in price, we've considered the complexity of which we need. Another question is the impact on the deal at competition. For the time trading, especially although Нinander versus market inversion, we expect at慢 trading without an ouro. a five minute chart of the E-mini and a five minute chart of ticks, and they can see the same signals, same types of signals. And then I also talked in particular about tick divergences. If you're getting a new low in price, but a higher low in ticks and you're in a bear trend, that bear trend is weakening and it may soon convert into a trading range and traders therefore will be more willing to buy for a scalp. Likewise, if the market's rallying and we have a new high in price, but a lower high in ticks, the trend is weakening, fewer stocks are participating and it increases the chances that the bull trend will soon evolve into a trading range and therefore traders are more willing to sell for scalps. This is Al Brooks. This is the third of five videos on scalping. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. just now on Dissa. Ok. Thank you.