 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth and final video on trading ranges. When the market's in a trading range, remember my 80% rule. Do not bet on breakouts because 80% of breakout attempts will fail. However, all trading ranges eventually successfully break out into a trend. I'll discuss that next. And every trend eventually evolves into a trading range. I'll talk about the early signs of a trading range. When the market's in a trading range, it does not spend much time at the top or at the bottom. It usually reverses back toward the middle of the range. And most of the trading takes place in the middle of the range. Prices keep getting pulled back to the middle. And in general, that's a bad area to be trading. It's much better to be looking for bear breakout attempts. Expect them to fail and buy a reversal up at the bottom. Bear breakout attempt. Micro double bottom. Buy a reversal up at the bottom. Expecting the market to rally at least enough up for a scalp. And traders should look to sell reversals down at the top. Couple legs up. Couple legs up. One pull back two. This is a little bit tricky. The reversal is so climactic and so extreme. Bulls are probably trapped and eager to get out. This is an instance when you probably can sell in the middle of the range. Expecting the market to fall at least far enough down for a scalp. One of the important things to realize in a trading range is you make more money by scalping. Because if you don't get out, the market usually comes back to your entry price. If you buy here and do not take your profit somewhere up here, guess what? The market comes all the way back to your entry price. And the same with up here. If you sell here and do not take profit when you have it, the market comes back to your entry price and then you have to decide what to do. Some traders like to sell with limit orders. For example, sell a strong bull close near the top or buy a strong bear close near the bottom. And again, when the market comes down to the middle of the range, take profits. Traders expect breakout attempts to fail and for the market to get back to the middle of the range. Bull breakout, bear breakout, bull breakout, bear breakout, bear breakout. So traders fade breakouts. And by fading, what I mean is you bet the breakout will fail. So if you get a bull breakout, to fade it means to sell it. If you get a bear breakout, to fade it means to buy it. Trading ranges are constantly trying to break out. Every one of these bull bars, every one of these bars with tails on top is an attempt to break to the upside. Every one of these bars with tails on the bottom, the bear bars are all attempts to break to the downside. And my 80% rule, 80% of trading range breakout attempts fail. Therefore, you stand to make more money betting on a failed breakout instead of betting that a breakout would be successful. It's bad to buy near the top. You have a decent looking bull bar, micro double bottom. Maybe that's an okay buy. If you take it and it goes up twice here and reverses down, you get out here with a loss. Here, this is a terrible buy. It might be a successful bull breakout, but it's better to wait to see if there's a second follow through bar. When you see the follow through bar looking like this and you bought here, you know you're going to lose money. Opposites true selling near the bottom. We've got a bear breakout here, but a big tail. Terrible follow through bar. For the bears, some bears will look at this as a pullback from this breakout and maybe they'll sell below that bar. I would not do that. You're selling a bear flag at the bottom of a trading range with a bad looking sell signal bar. So selling that close or selling below this bull bar, it's a losing strategy. Instead, you should be doing the opposite. You should buy low, sell high and scalp. BLSHS. Bet that the breakouts will fail. So you see a bear breakout? An experienced trader will buy that bear close, betting it will fail. Here you get a reversal up. Second reversal up. One pullback two. A high two buy. Buying near the bottom. That is a reasonable buy. A reversal down. Two legs up. One pullback two. Two legs up. One pullback two. Sell the close. If you don't want to be selling below the low of the bar or below the low of this bar, in case that reversal bar is big, a lot of traders will simply sell the close thinking that, well, the bulls need one more bar. Chances are they will not get it. So I'll sell that close, betting that the next bar will be a bear bar. The same with right here. You could sell that close, betting that the bulls need at least one more bar. They probably will not get it. So just sell that close. Or you can sell the reversal down below that bear bar. All trading ranges eventually break into trends. The market's in the trading range. And then we have a couple very big bull bars closing far above the highs of the past 40, 50, 60 bars. Every trading range always leads to a successful breakout. You have a better chance of a profit if you wait to see a strong breakout. Now what do I mean by a strong breakout? Well, it's good to have a very big breakout bar. It's good to have follow through on the next bar or the next two, three or four bars. Consecutive big bull trend bars increase the chances of a successful breakout. No tails or small tails on the tops of the bars. The close of this bar above the high of many bars. Here this close is above the high of the past 50 or 60 bars. Here we have a trading range. Breakout mode. 50% chance bull breakout. 50% chance bear breakout. Sometimes a trading range simply bends into a trend without ever having a strong breakout. For the bears, they're hoping for a bear breakout, a lower high, and another bear breakout, and a series of lower highs and lower lows. And the bulls are hoping that we're getting higher high, higher high, higher low compared to that low. And they're hoping that that will continue up and they'll get a broad bull channel. Well, the bulls won. We have a little bit of a breakout here, but still within the range. And now we have a breakout with follow through, probably going higher, but not an impressive breakout. Every reversal attempt, the bulls kept buying. So the reversals were small and the bull channel was tight. And the result was a bull trend without ever having a very impressive strong bull breakout. A little breakout here, a little bit more here, but it still resulted in a bull trend. Trading range. We got lower highs and higher lows. Breakout mode. Traders are always looking for some imbalance between the bulls and bears prior to the breakout to get some idea of the direction of the breakout. And it often allows traders to enter swing trades before the breakout takes place. Is there anything going on here that would increase the chances of a bull breakout or a bear breakout? We have five consecutive bear bars and six consecutive bear bars here. We have some lower highs and lower lows. Look at the consecutive bull bars. We have two consecutive bull bars here. We have two here, two here. The bears are owning more bars in a row. That's selling pressure. Even though this is a bull trend and a pullback and the pullback grew into a trading range, the bears are starting to own more bars, more consecutive bars, three more bars here. So that's an early sign of bears being stronger than bulls. And then we have lower highs here, here, here, here, and lower lows. Yes, we still have higher low here and we still are following a bull trend, but there are early signs that the bears might be winning. And ultimately the bears did win. Never had a strong breakout, but it did have a bear breakout and it worked lower. And then we have a strong reversal up, but not much bull strength. Bad follow through after this bull bar, after this bull bar. Parabolic wedge, one, two, three. Probably going to go sideways. Initially this was a pullback, but once it reaches 10, 20, 30 bars, I call it a trading range. By pullback, I assume the market's going to resume up. But when it fails to resume up for 10, 20, or 30 bars, I call it a trading range. And by trading range, I mean the probability of a bull breakout, trend resumption up, has fallen to the same as the probability of a bear breakout, trend reversal down. Again, look at the bear legs. Consecutive bear bars, more bear bars closing in their lows, and compare it to the bull legs. Where are the consecutive big bull trend bars? The bears are starting to own the market for more bars at a time. A sign of strong bears. Two consecutive bull bars, a doji, but two consecutive bull bars, followed by three stronger bear bars. We have a bear trend, and then a pullback. And the pullback grew to 20 or more bars. So a trading range, 50% chance we'll get a successful bull breakout or trend reversal. 50% chance we'll get a successful trend resumption down. Also, whenever the market's in a tight trading range, it's in breakout mode. 50% chance the first breakout will fail. Here, we're trying to break to the downside, and it reversed up. Traders look at every breakout as a possible reversal, and they expect then a possible breakout in the opposite direction. The bears have three consecutive bear bars, closed maybe slightly below this low, and all of these lows, so it's a breakout, but reversed up. So whenever you see a breakout, be prepared for a breakout and a trend in the opposite direction. It could happen here as well. We have a bull breakout, and it could fail, and we could reverse down into a bear trend. However, the bears had a pretty good chance here, pretty good chance here, and the bulls reversed up, and then they have a pretty good bull bar here. And it was followed by a bull trend. Look what took place here. After that bear breakout attempt, we have 9 bars here, and only one bear bar in the past 9 bars. The bears are losing control. It's not a lot of strong bull bars, but it's only one bear bar out of 9 bars. So the bulls are owning a lot of bars. This close, a big bull bar, in fact it's the biggest trend bar up or down in the past 40 or 50 bars, and it closed not only above the trading range, but far above the trading range. That increases the chances that it will be successful. Yes, the bears tried to reverse it. They tried to make it a failed breakout, but the bulls got a breakout test by here, a breakout test of this high. In fact, there's probably a little gap between this high and that low, and a good buy signal bar. They get a breakout above this bull flag, and then a pullback here, and then another breakout. Bull flag by the breakout above the bull bar. And you can call this a bigger bull flag, or simply a breakout of this bull flag and a pullback from this breakout. So this becomes a small bull flag and this small bull trend. All trends, all channels, eventually become trading ranges, and I want to talk a little bit about the early signs of a transition into a trading range. This is a five minute chart of the Euro versus the dollar Forex market. And the start of the US session, it's never exact, but it's around 5.30 in the morning Pacific time. I always pay attention to the first five or 10 bars to see what they look like. What does this look like? We have a couple of bull bars, but then a bear bar, a bull bar, and then a doji, and then bear bars, and then a reversal up. Plus look to the left, a lot of trading range price action. An absence of strong consecutive bars up or down. We have a couple big bull bars here, but a reversal down. Bear bar here, but a doji. Bear bar here, but a doji. This looks like a bear leg, and what will become a trading range. This looks like a bull leg, and what will become a trading range. Trading range price action on the open, and even though overnight it sold off, the sell-off had a lot of trading range price action, meaning that this bear channel probably is soon going to evolve into a trading range. The odds are the market is going to have trading range price action for at least an hour or two or three on the open today. And it did. Strong bull breakout, bad follow through. Another attempt to break out, bad follow through. And these first few bars were a warning that today would have a lot of trading range price action, especially in the context of a weak sell-off like this, which looks like a bear leg and a trading range. Bear channel, bear trend, but probably it will evolve into a trading range, which it did. When you're over here looking back, you'd say that this is part of the trading range, even though if you're at this point, you think you're in a bear trend. It's a bear trend, yes, but probably a bear leg and what will evolve into a trading range. Is this the first bar of the day session? Maybe. If it is, it's a doji. Very prominent tails on all of the bars here. A lot of overlapping bars. The bars almost completely overlap. A lot of reversals up and down and up and down and up and down. That's all trading range price action. And it increases the chances that the market will have a lot of trading range price action for the first couple of hours. And it increases the chances that the entire day will have a lot of trading range price action. Bear bar and bull bars. Bull bars, then bear bars. Bad follow through. Lots of reversals. Five or more reversals in the first hour or two. Many bull bars, many bear bars. Lots of reversals of directions. Trading range price action. I don't have a moving average shown here, but the moving average would be pretty flat. That's another sign that the market is not trending. No gap on the open. Forex markets don't typically have gaps, but futures markets and stock markets often have gaps. And that absence of gaps and then this trading range price action all adds to the increased probabilities that the day will have a lot of trading range trading. With all of these reversals and the bad follow through, it's easier to make money with limit orders selling above bars. If you're buying below bars, betting breakouts will fail. Buying below bars, betting bear breakouts will fail. Then it is to enter with stops and make money. Stop orders are less successful than limit orders. That's another sign of a trading range day. I call it a limit order market. When it's easier to make money with limit orders than with stop orders, the market's probably going to be in a trading range. And then the prior session was a trading range or it had a lot of trading range price action. This part of it is a bear trend, but it's mostly a trading range. It looks more like a broad bear channel with lots of reversals. Basically a trading range that sloped somewhat down. If you're looking at a chart and you're feeling confused, for example, by all of the reversals, or if you're feeling anxious, that's your personal radar telling you that the market's probably in a trading range. So get peaceful and trade it like a trading range. Don't worry about trading it like a trend. It's not a trend and it's probably not going to trend. A trading range day usually reverses and tests the middle of the range repeatedly. Later in the day, if it tries to break free of the open of the day, it usually comes back and tests the open. And it usually ends up closing around the open of the day. If the open of the day is in the middle third of the day's range, the day usually tends to close near the open. Sometimes it can turn into a bull trend at the end or a bear trend at the end. But most of the time when you have repeated reversals around the open of the day and the open is in the middle third of the range, the day will close around the middle third of the range as well. And the bar will end up as a doji bar on the daily chart. Trying to break free and become a trend at the end of the day. But the breakout is not all that strong. Chances are we're going to come back and test the open. The session began as a tight trading range. The range for the entire session was fairly tight. And it ended up closing right around where the session started. I talk more about the behavior at the end of a trading range day in the video on trading the end of the day. I began by talking about when you see a trading range, don't bet on a breakout. If anything, bet the breakouts will fail and look to fade the range. Look to sell at the top and buy at the bottom, betting that the breakouts will fail. All trading ranges eventually break into trends. And sometimes there are signs that give a clue to the direction of the breakout. And you should look at those as the trading range is forming. And finally, early in every day, early in every session in the Forex markets, there are signs that can tell you that the day is likely to become a trading range day. If you see lots of reversals, lots of overlapping bars, very prominent tails on the first few bars of the day, that's often a sign that the entire day is going to be mostly a trading range day. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth of six videos on trading ranges. If you've seen the first einer Show naughty decks. One of them are true. One of them are just about two firstり of nine게 deineividades. Another thing you are doing is intimidated with bad TV isn't available to