 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on final flags. I'll begin by talking about small final flags and then I'll move on to II final flags. An II pattern is an inside bar that follows another inside bar. So it's consecutive inside bars and even a small pattern like two bars can lead to a major reversal. That II can be a small final flag. Sometimes a final flag can be as small as a single bar. We have a bear trend, very big breakout, an attempt to reverse, probably going to fail. And then we have a small bear flag, a two bar bear flag. And look at this. This became the low of the bear trend. Yes, we tested down here again. However, this is potentially the low of the bear trend. We have a two bar bear flag and it led to a couple legs up. And then ultimately you can call this a double bottom or slightly lower low major trend reversal. And then a higher low major trend reversal. Usually when the channel is tight like this, the first reversal up is minor, which means probably either a larger bear flag or a trading range. In either case, you're probably going to get a deep pullback, sometimes to a new slightly lower low. Minor reversal usually leads to an attempt to resume the trend, sometimes the trading range. In any case, chances are when you're getting a tight bear channel like this and even like this, the first reversal up, if it's not clearly a major reversal, the first reversal up is probably minor and you're going to get a deep pullback. Here we have a wedge bottom. One, two, three. So one, two, three. A decent bull bar following another bull bar here, another bull bar here, another bull bar here. So good buying pressure, good buying pressure here. I think this is a pretty good looking lower low major trend reversal. And then we have a higher low major trend reversal as well. This rally two legs up, one pull back two. You can call it a low two. A moving average gap bar. A bar with a gap below its low and above the moving average usually leads to the final leg of the bear trend before a major trend reversal. You can call this a double top bear flag. You can call it a breakout test of this breakout point. I think it's important to remember that even a good looking major trend reversal like this only has a 40% chance of reversing into a bull swing or bull trend. Most of the time, either the bear trend resumes or the market goes sideways. And here, the bear trend ended and the market went sideways for about 30 bars. And then we got a higher low major trend reversal and another attempt up by the bulls. However, it still leads to a profitable trade, a profitable swing trade. If you bought here, it would be a swing profit getting up below that low or holding for a second leg up and then exiting maybe somewhere in this tight trading range. Once the bull trend became more neutral, possibly at the end of the session. In the neighborhood of a measured move target. Two legs down, huge cell climax, probably at least a little bit more down. After this big cell climax, you have to be expecting one more leg down, but sometimes that's all you get. When you see this two bar pullback, you have to be wondering, it might be the end of the bear trend, the final bear flag, and the breakout might reverse up consecutive cell climaxes. Big cell climax, smaller cell climax. This could be a two bar final bear flag. And it was. Good context for a major trend reversal and a good buy signal bar. And as I said, there are a lot of other very good buy signal bars as well. Here, here, a lot of bull bars closing near their highs. The bulls are getting stronger. When you see a lower low major trend reversal, the odds are good that either the market will be in a trading range and you're buying near the low, or it could be the start of a bull swing. So this is a very good buy. You manage the trade just like any other trade. If you're buying what you think might be a minor reversal, you're only looking for a scalp. A major reversal means you're looking for a swing trade in the opposite direction or a trend. Therefore, when you buy a reversal that you think might be minor, in general, it's better to be looking for a scalp. A major reversal. You can look for a scalp, but it's usually better to be looking for a swing profit or at least to swing part of your position. Very tight bear channel. Probably a minor reversal, although it could lead to the end of the bear trend. Traders buying here, chances are, even with a strong rally like this, you're going to have big down, big up, big confusion. The reversal will be minor and the market will convert into a trading range, which means you'll get another leg down and an attempt at forming a trading range. Traders who buy here will take relatively quick profits. Get out maybe below here, below here, below here. You buy here, initial stop below that low. This is two times your initial risk. A reasonable location to begin to take profits. Also around the moving average, around this high. Also a reasonable area to take profits. A breakout test of the breakout point here. A reasonable place to take profits. Here we have a major trend reversal. A double bottom or slightly lower low major trend reversal. Reasonable for a swing trade. Either to here or you just hold until the bull trend ends or the session ends and you get out somewhere up in here. Tight channel. Probably a minor reversal. Although it could be major. This could be the final bear flag. And this is clearly a major reversal. A major pattern has a lot of bars. More likely to lead to a major swing. A minor reversal. Not many bars. Usually not enough to reverse a trend. Usually leads to either a big bear flag or a trading range. If you buy above this bar, your stop is just below its low. A reasonable place to take at least partial profits is two times your initial risk. And you can see there were some profit taking here. It's also in the area of this prior high. Traders are aware that instead of this becoming a bull trend, it might simply be a trading range. And traders want to look to buy low, sell high. Buy low, buy low. Sell high, sell high. And selling high can be bears selling to get short. It's also bulls selling out to take profits on longs. At this point, we're still in a bear channel. We have a lower low. And we're still getting lower highs. And therefore, we could get a new low. And we could still get a series of lower highs and lower lows. This then is potentially a leg in a bear channel. Which means it's potentially another bear flag. A wedge rally, but a lower high. This is the start of a bull trend. It's also a leg in a trading range. And it's also a bear flag. You don't know which will end up being in hindsight. But at this point, some bears will take the short. We have a wedge rally to a lower high. It'll take a chance that this is a broad bear channel. And that this is a big double top. The market might fall below the neckline of that double top. And fall for a measured move down. So this is a final flag in the bear trend. Just like this was a small final flag. This was a bigger final bear flag. It led to the end of the bear trend. This is also another bear flag. Even though it's a reversal up, it's still a bear flag as well. It led to a breakout. But the breakout did not go to a new low. So it is a type of final bear flag. But the bear breakout only went down to a higher low. Here, in this case, a triangle. A higher low, major trend reversal. We have a low, low, major trend reversal here. Usually followed by a higher, low, major trend reversal. Which we have here. And at least one more leg up. This triangle could also have been a final bear flag. We could have had a bear breakout. And then a reversal up. Here, it was a final bear flag. We never got the bear breakout. We got a bull breakout of the bear flag. We had a good rally after the lower, low, major trend reversal. And this triangle became part of a higher, low, major trend reversal. And a second leg up. Most traders would call this a triangle and a higher, low, major trend reversal. And not a final bear flag. But in fact, it is a type of final bear flag. Just like this is a final flag. This is a final flag. And this is also a final bear flag. It's also a head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, slightly lower head, and a right shoulder. We have a bull trend lasting 20 or more bars. And then a tight trading range. And a tight trading range, late and a bull trend, often is the final bull flag. And the breakout often fails and leads to a reversal down. A huge breakout above the tight trading range. And then a bull trend. Whenever you get the biggest bull bar occurring 20 or more bars into a bull trend, the odds are it'll be an exhaustion gap rather than a measuring gap. The gap between this close and this high, this close and any of these highs, that gap is probably going to close. And then when you get a bad follow through bar for the bulls like this, the odds are even higher that the gap is going to close. We might get one more little push up, but the odds are a big bull trend bar late and a bull trend after a potential final flag. It's probably going to be a second leg trap. Leg one, pull back leg two, and then this bear bar closing near its low. Traders will short here, taking a chance that we get at least to the bottom of the buy climax. And once there, the market might fall for a measured move down based upon the height of that buy climax. We have a high two bull flag. Here's a high one. Here's a high two. This became the final bull flag, even though the breakout did not go above the top of the bull trend. This was the last bull flag in this bull trend. So a small final flag. For the bears, it's the double top bear flag. Remember, when you get a big breakout bar like this, you'll have some bulls buying the close. And then they look at the spare bar and they say, oh, that's not what I want. I'm disappointed. I want to get out break even. A lot of these buy the close bulls then place a limit order to get out break even. The market tried to get up there and did not let them out and tried to get up there again and did not let them out. If you're a buy the close bull here, disappointed by this, trying to get out break even here and not filled. And then you try to get out break even again here and not filled. What's going to happen? You're probably going to wonder if this is an exhaustive buy climax and the end of the bull trend. And you'll look to get out on the reversal down. And that's what caused the series of bear bars closing near their lows. The bulls have bought up here or anywhere in here are finally giving up, acknowledging that this is probably an exhaustive end of the bull trend and not a measuring gap leading to a continued move up. The bulls gave up and the bear started to sell aggressively, confident that at a minimum the market would get down to the bottom of the buy climax here or here. Also, the magnetic pull of the tight trading range. We should get down there as well. I'm going to finish up by talking about I I final flags and inside bar that is inside another bar late in a trend often becomes the final flag. We have a bull breakout here and it's in a bull trend and this bar is inside of that bar. Inside bar means the high is at or below the high of the prior bar and the low is at or above the low of the prior bar. So this bar is inside that this bar is inside that this is an I I pattern inside inside I I consecutive inside bars. When it occurs late in a trend, it can lead to a reversal. Sometimes you'll get a bull breakout and then a reversal. Other times you simply get the reversal. We have an I I bull flag after a buy climax. Every bull trend bar is a buy climax. And if it is a big bull bar occurring late in a bull trend, 20 more bars into a bull trend, the odds of it leading to a reversal become greater than the odds of it leading to a successful bull trend. Whenever I see an I I pattern, I'm always assuming that it is a triangle on a smaller timeframe chart. A triangle is a breakout mode situation. So 50% chance of a bull breakout, 50% chance of a bear breakout. I I pattern is a small triangle, an I I triangle, at least on a smaller timeframe chart. Traders will look to sell the reversal. It's breakout mode. So traders are looking for a swing down or a swing up. If we did get the up move, because it's a triangle, it's a magnet, the up move usually does not get very far before it tries to reverse back down. Bears will sell below that I I after an possible exhaustive buy climax. This is an I I potential final bull flag. It was the final bull flag. We never got a bull breakout. We got a bear breakout below the bull flag, but it was the final bull flag. Sometimes you'll have a bull flag that gets a bear breakout and not a bull breakout. It's still a bull flag. And in this case, it's the final bull flag in the bull trend. This is the dollar versus the end, a 240 minute chart. We have a bear trend and it reversed up. But look at this. We have an inside bar. Its low is at or above the low of the prior bar. Its high is at or below the high of the prior bar. Its an inside bar inside of another inside bar consecutive inside bars. I I on a small timeframe chart. It's a triangle. If you were to look at a smaller timeframe chart like five minute chart, you probably would see a triangle here. We went down. We went up. We went down. We went up. We went down. We went down. We went down. The bar. 50% chance the breakout will fail and reverse 50% chance. The initial breakout will be successful. Here we tried to reverse up. We tried to get a bull breakout above the small bear flag. We then got a bear breakout, but the bear breakout failed and it failed again and reversed up. This is the final flag in a bear trend that went on for 20 or more bars. It's also after a cell climax. So this gap might be an exhaustive cell climax. It might be an exhaustion gap at the end of the bear trend. We did get a second leg down. Leg one, pull back leg two. But this became the final bear flag in this bear trend and it led to a reversal up. Any kind of a triangle, even an II pattern, it's a triangle on a smaller timeframe chart. Any kind of a triangle late in a trend can become the final flag. It's a breakout situation. We got a bull breakout that failed, a bear breakout that reversed up twice and led to a swing up. I-I, 50% chance the initial breakout will fail. That's not a particularly good looking buy signal bar. This bear bar closing on its low. A lot of traders would wait to see if we reverse up strongly and then buy. Some bears would sell above the high of that bear bar, betting that the bull reversal will fail. Would bulls buy above this bear bar? Probably not. Not in a bear trend. However, now we have a micro double bottom and a second attempt to reverse up from the breakout below this II bear flag. And this bar is a bull bar closing on its high. We have a bull bar here and a bull bar here. We're starting to accumulate buying pressure. This gap might be an exhaustion gap. This is a reasonable buy. This is a good buy. We have a very strong bull trend. It's climactic. Big breakout and then another breakout and another breakout and another breakout. But look at this. This is a bull flag. It's only a single doji bar. However, it became the final bull flag and a very strong bull trend. Spike and channel bull trend. So spike, pullback, parabolic channel. You can call it a parabolic wedge if you want. First push up here, pullback. Second push here, pullback. Maybe third push here, pullback. Another pullback. Breakout, pullback. Breakout, pullback. Breakout, pullback. On a smaller timeframe chart, this tail, first push up, second push up, third push up. This to me looks like a parabolic biclimax. You can call it a parabolic wedge. Different computers will use different bars for the numbering. It's a parabolic biclimax. And then when you get a small bull flag like this after a parabolic biclimax, usually the market's not going to go much higher before you get profit taking. This little bar became the final bull flag after a series of consecutive biclimaxes. Each bull trend bar, each consecutive bull trend bars is biclimax, biclimax. Here, a four bar biclimax, another biclimax. At some point, the stop is so far away, the bulls have to take profits. And that's what happened here. They have a micro double top, a pretty strong reversal down, closing near its low. Bulls will get out below this bear bar. And bears will sell, expecting at least two legs down. One pullback two, maybe one pullback two, maybe one pullback two. When you have a series of consecutive biclimaxes like this, you have weak bears selling all the way up. And at some point, they stop selling because they keep buying back for a loss. And here, the weak bears are covering probably for the final time. And the bulls are using the series of biclimaxes, especially after this pause, to take profits. Their stop is far away. They want to reduce the position size. They know this is potentially a final bull flag that could lead to a reversal. A lot of bulls will take profits with this final breakout. And strong bears will start selling. They'll sell above this bar. They'll sell above that bar. They'll start selling bull closes, confident that the bull trend will not go much further after so many biclimaxes and without much of a pullback. The smart bulls, they're taking profits. They understand what's going on. In consecutive biclimaxes, a pullback. This could be the final bull flag. They're going to use this close to take profits. The bulls sell. So strong bulls sell. Strong bears sell. And the weak bears finally give up. They end up buying back their shorts at the high. Exactly where the strong bears are selling. And exactly where the strong bulls are taking profits. And those strong bulls are not looking to buy again one or two bars later. They're going to wait at least 10 or 20 bars before buying again. Otherwise, why would they get out? They don't want to get out and then buy one bar later. A strong bull getting out is only going to buy again five or 10 bars later. He wants to see if the bears can reverse the market. If the bears fail to reverse, then the bulls will buy. Here, the bears did a very good job reversing. Consecutive biclimaxes often have a small bull flag for the final bull flag. Sometimes it's simply a single bar. Here, you can call it two bars if you want. To me, the pullback, this bar below that low, is the pullback bar. It's a one-bar bull flag. And it's only a doji, but bulls are aware. After a series of biclimaxes, sometimes you get a very unremarkable bull flag, and it's the final flag in the bull trend. A very tight bull channel. So, chances are the reversal down will be minor and lead to a trading range rather than a bear trend. However, it's a low risk short. You short below the low of this bear bar, stop just above its high, and chances are we're either going to go sideways or down. And the bull trend will stop for at least 10 bars or so before the bulls will buy again. Very tight bull channel. More likely a minor reversal into a trading range, but sometimes you get a swing down like we did here. Three consecutive bear bars, two closing on their lows. This is probably now always in short for at least a small second leg down. So, one pullback two, maybe. Very tight channel. This reversal up is probably minor, and will probably go more sideways to down. So, climaxes also often have final flags, and sometimes the final flags are small. A pair of bear bars, cell climax, cell climax. Small cell climax, you can call this maybe a five bar cell climax. A cell that closed bear trend lasting about eight bars, cell climax. And then a cell climax here as well. We have a small double top bear flag. This bar and that bar. A low two short, low one, low two. Late in a bear trend after a series of three or four consecutive cell climaxes. You have to be thinking that the bears are going to take profits and then wait at least five or ten bars before selling again. And the strong bulls will start buying using wide stops scaling in. Betting that we will probably not get much more selling without the market first either entering a trading range or reversing up. The weak bulls, they get squeezed out here. The bulls keep buying and selling with a loss. Buying, selling with a loss. Buying, selling with a loss. And eventually there are no more weak bulls left. And all you're left with are strong bulls and they're never going to get out. They're going to use wide stops and they're going to look at this as value. And they'll keep buying every bear breakout. Expecting that at some point the bears have to take profits and we'll get a reversal up. The smart bears, they're no longer willing to sell after a series of cell climaxes. They start taking profits. So the strong bears are buying, taking profits. And the strong bulls are buying, betting that we'll get a profit taking rally. Even though this small double top bear flag does not look very impressive, it can be the end of the bear trend. When you have a series of cell climaxes, the final bear flag is often very small. One bar, here it's four bars. Yet it can lead to a major reversal. A decent looking bull bar after another cell climax bar. In fact, the best looking bear bar in 20 or more bars. That increases the chances that it's an exhaustive cell climax. The gap between the close of this bar that low, the close of this bar this low, probably will close. And the market will try to reverse at least into a trading range, possibly into a bull trend. Low risk. You buy above the high of this bull bar, closing near its high. Stop below its low. High reward. Usually the market tries to go up to the top of the most recent cell climax. Yes, this high is the most recent cell climax. However, this is much more impressive. This is a reasonable target for the bulls. They're buying, not much risk, and reward much, much bigger than the risk. And the probability is pretty good. Maybe 50-50 probability. Once you start to get this and then this, the probability starts to go up. 50%, 60% that we're going up to this high. Higher probability. Wait until you get the bear breakout. Buy this close, buy that close. Here we have a triangle, three pushes down. One, pull back. Two, pull back. Three. I don't know if it's an II. It's very close to an II. But in any case, it's a high probability buy after this much momentum that we'll get at least a small second leg up. Higher probability to buy after you see the strong bull break out. But the risk is greater. If you're buying up here, your stop is here. So you have more risk buying here than you do buying here because stop is only right here. And that's always the case. Once the market becomes a high probability trade, the stop is usually further away. So you have worse risk reward. Greater risk, stop further away. You're buying later into the bull trend. So less reward. However, a very good trade, very high probability trade here, a very good trade as well. Probability, not all that good, but the potential reward is far greater than the risk. Traders who want the most reward and least risk, take this buy. Those who want higher probability and who are willing to take more risk, they wait to buy here or here. Both have positive traders equations. In this video, I talked about small final flags. They can also lead to major reversals. And then I moved on and talked about II final flags, consecutive inside bars. Even though it's only two bars, it can lead to a breakout and then a reversal. So you can have an II pattern being a final flag and a trend. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks trading course. This is the second of two videos on final flags. Thank you.