 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on starting out as a trader. I first want to talk about false beliefs that lots of traders have when they begin trading. Next, I want to talk about the big picture, buy low, sell high. Finally, I'll talk about chart types and timeframes. One of the problems that all traders have starting out is they come in with a false belief. They believe that traders have secret setups and great ways to make money, that there's a golden goose out there laying eggs, golden eggs for a small handful of really good traders, really rich traders. And that's not true. There are no perfect trades. Traders are always asking me, Al, what's the best setup? And what they're asking me is, Al, how can I make a lot of money with very little risk and win a high percentage of the time? And the answer is you cannot. You certainly cannot do it as a trader. Because there always has to be an institution taking the other side of the trade. So there are no secrets. There are no secret great setups. Everyone sees the same thing and everyone is competing, trying to make as much money as we possibly can. Here we have a bear trend. We have a lot of bull bars closing near their highs. We tried to reverse up here. We tried to reverse up again here and then again here. And we have a double bottom. Traders will buy above the high of this bar. Double bottom, lots of bull bars. Traders want to believe that there's some simple way to get rich, but there's not. Trading is always going to be hard because there will always be equally smart, if not smarter people and institutions believing the exact opposite of what you believe. Remember, if you're buying, you're buying from someone and that someone almost always is going to be an institution. And if that institution is selling, then that has to be a warning to you that maybe your perfect setup is not as perfect as you think. So in this setup, sure, it's a decent buy. Most buys, most sells have between 40 and 60 percent probability of being profitable. And that's true of this buy as well. But even if it's 50 percent, that means 50 percent chance it's not going to be profitable. And you have to be open to that possibility. Another thing that traders often erroneously believe is that there's a best time to enter. To wait for the right candlestick pattern and then buy or sell. But the reality is, if you look at the volume of these bars, the volume is big on all of the bars. And what does that tell you? That tells you that there's lots of trading taking place every second of the day. And that tells you that every second of the day, there are institutions who believe there's a good reason to buy. And there are other institutions that believe there's a good reason to sell. And if you don't take the first entry, no big deal. There are always countless other entries. Some bears will sell the break up below this double bottom. Others will sell this close. Others will sell above this week reversal. The bottom line is there's no best time to enter. Sometimes it might be easier emotionally than others, but you can enter at any time all day long. As long as you structure your trade correctly. You first decide, do I want to buy? Do I want to sell? Then you decide where your stop is going to be. Then you decide on your position size. And then you decide on your goal. Where do you want to take profits? The key is to learn how to read the charts so that you can see the reasons why institutions are buying and selling all day long. When you see a chart like this, every bar has a lot of volume. You know there are institutions finding reasons to buy and there are other institutions finding reasons to sell. And all it takes is a little practice for you to see those reasons. And then you can enter at any time. You do not have to worry about taking the first trade or the first entry. There are always going to be other entries. So if you don't sell the break up below the double bottom, sell the close of this bar. No big deal. You could say, well that's not a very good looking buy. Well then sell it. Sell above the high of this buy signal bar. Betting that a pair of doji's is not enough to reverse this big bear bar. Also betting that we have a double bottom, a reasonable buy, and a big bear breakout. So you have bulls who are trapped in desperate for any bounce to sell. And you have bears who did not take the original sell desperate for any bounce to sell. Chances are you are going to have a second leg down. So sell above the weak reversal, expecting at least a little bit more down. And then you've got trend resumption. We have a bear bar closing on its low. Sell below that bar. So you can see the big picture in trading. What's the big picture in trading? You obviously want to buy low because you want to sell higher. And if you're shorting, you obviously want to sell high because you want to buy lower. One of the most important concepts in trading is that you want to be buying at support and selling at resistance. But look at this. There is no resistance here. We're just racing up. During a bull breakout, the market races up to the next level of resistance, maybe based upon a measured move. So we've got a breakout bar here and the middle of the breakout bar above the breakout point and the first pullback here or here. Measured move from the bottom of the bull leg to the top of what could have been a top. Instead, we've got a breakout. So traders expect some kind of a measured move up. All minor resistance, you have to expect it will fail. When a bull trend is pretty strong like this, any reason to sell is bad. You should only be looking to buy because, yes, there's resistance. Here we've got a double top. Here we've got a triple top. Doesn't matter. In a strong bull trend where the pullbacks are very small and you have a lot of bull bars, very few bear bars, the odds are the market's going higher. All resistance will fail. So you see a wedge top? Don't sell. Another wedge top? Don't sell. The pullbacks are too small and no bear bars, just not enough big bear bars closing on their lows. Double top, do you want to sell? No. Double top, do you want to sell? No. Because all resistance will fail, whenever you see resistance and you see the market trying to reverse, you should look to do the exact opposite. You should assume that the reversal attempt will be a bold flag and look to buy. Try and reverse, look to buy. Try and reverse, buy. Buy. Buy. Try and reverse, buy. Buy. Buy again. In a bear trend, the exact opposite is true. You want to buy a support, but you want to make sure that the market is starting to base, it's starting to show some signs of buying pressure. When the market is falling like this with the pullbacks being very weak, the buy signal bar is small, the channel down very tight, you don't want to be buying. The market is racing down to the support level. You may not know what the support level is, but it's there. A good place to look is a measured move. We've got a breakout here. The market may have been bottoming here. We may have had a double bottom. Instead, we broke to the downside and had follow through. So this is probably going to be a measuring gap that will lead to a measured move down. Look at the start of the move and then look at the middle of the gap or the low of that bar and project down the same distance. And look what happened. A lot of computers decided to take profits at that support level. And all of these minor reversals will fail. And instead of looking to buy every reversal or every wedge that you see, instead, you should be looking for them to fail and then expecting them to become bear flags and look to sell. So we got a double bottom failed. We have a wedge failed. We have a wedge. We tried to get a double bottom here and tried to get a double bottom here. We just keep breaking out below all prior lows and we're forming gaps. This low, that high, very little overlap. This low, that high, the market is probably going lower. You have to find any reason to get short. And a good way to get short is to look for a reversal attempt up and expect it to fail and then sell as it resumes down. Trying to reverse up, look to sell below that bear bar. Trying to pause, maybe reverse up double bottom, look to sell. Trying to reverse up, look to sell, sell, sell. And don't look for wedge bottoms and double bottoms when a channel is as tight as this. Because any reversal is almost certainly going to be minor, which means it'll become a bear flag and you'll make more money by looking to sell than looking to buy. With all trading, management is more important than picking the right entry. Remember I said you could pretty much buy or sell on any bar during the day. There are only 10% of the bars during the day that are breaking out strongly like this. And when that's the case, you only want to look to buy. But the other 90% of the bars, you could either buy or sell and make money if you manage your trade correctly. If you use wide stops, if you're scaling in. When you see a strong breakout, it's good to enter as early as possible. You can still make money buying this highest close, but your stop is still down here. And it would be better if you could buy more above a bull bar here or here. So you buy and then scale in and then either get out of your original trade here, break even, and then with a profit here. Or get out break even on the first entry and hold these for a swing up. If the risk is big, so you buy up here and your stop is here and it's much bigger than what you want. You can always use options for stock replacement, or you can just simply trade small. If this is a daily chart and this is a stock and it's racing up and your stop is too far, you might instead buy calls or buy a call spread. If you miss the first entry, that's not a problem. Buy as soon as you possibly can. The key is to use the correct stop. Even if you buy way up at the top, the stop is here. If you buy here, the stop is here. If you buy here, the stop is here. It doesn't matter where you buy. All that matters is the price action. And this price action tells you the stop is here, maybe here. That is the important factor. You've got to use the correct stop. And if the stop is very far, you have to reduce your profit target. You know, you don't want to be using too tight a stop. For example, you don't want to be stopping out below this bull bar because chances are double top. We're going to pull back a little bit. You know, that's not the correct stop below there. The stop is down here or below here. Another thing that beginners often believe is that trading is relatively easy. If I learn a dozen candlestick patterns, that's all I need. If I take some trades that are mentioned on some website, that's all I need to make money. But that cannot be the case because there are so many institutions out there looking for every way to make money. And if you see a high probability way to make money, guess what? They see it too. And let's say you're buying and it's a high probability buy. They're going to stop selling to you. In fact, they'll buy with you as well. So it's a fallacy to believe that you can learn how to trade in a week or two, learn maybe a dozen candlestick patterns, and then a few chart patterns on some website. You're not going to make money doing that. I'm absolutely confident that you cannot make money doing that. Trading is hard work. It has to be hard because you're competing against really smart people and they are not going to give you a penny. They're going to try to take every penny that they possibly can take. If you're out there expecting perfect trades, you're going to discover that no matter how perfect they are, they're going to lose money. So here we have a good looking buy signal bar, maybe a double bottom, lower load double bottom. The bulls lost money. Another bull reversal, the bulls lost money. Why? Because the bear channel is tight and it's only good for bears to make money. Trying to buy in a very tight bear channel, the chance of you making money is small. When you're trading, as I said, you're competing against the best traders in the world, the smartest people in the world, and they're very good at what they do. And they're competing among one another. Any advantage that one firm has over the others is always going to be small. Everybody's edge is going to be small. And simply looking at candlestick patterns, it's a fraud. Any website that advocates buying, you know, just look at a candlestick pattern and buy, it's a fraud. It's not going to work. You need context, you need management, and it takes a long time to become a good trader. That's why I have so many videos in this course. I'm giving you all the information that you really need to become extremely good. But you have to put the time in. Every trader tends to have favorite patterns. Every trader tends to have a favorite market. I trade mostly E-minis and Forex markets, especially the Euro versus the dollar. But I also trade bond futures, crude oil, sometimes gold, and stocks and options. And I use the same techniques no matter what the market is because trading is genetically based. It's rational human behavior. And it doesn't matter whether it's trading playing cards as a kid, trading real estate, or trading stocks or bonds or futures or commodities. It's all logical, rational human behavior. So traders approach all markets with the same ideas, the same techniques. Take a look at these two charts. Which is the Forex chart and which is the gold chart? Are you going to trade one chart differently from the other if I tell you that one is gold and one is Forex? Of course not. You're going to trade them based upon what you see. When the market's going up, you're looking to buy. When it's going down, you're looking to sell. And it doesn't matter what the market is. It could be the housing market. It could be real estate prices in your city. And because you cannot tell which is gold and which is the Euro versus the dollar Forex chart, you trade them the same. Forex, stocks, bonds, commodities, e-mini, stock index futures, they're all financial markets. And they all react to the same news. And they often trend at the same time, sometimes in opposite directions, but they all trend at the same time. And it does not matter which market you choose to trade. Every trader has a favorite. I trade mostly e-minis in Forex markets, but some traders prefer crude oil. Other traders prefer stocks. Other traders prefer ETFs or bonds. It doesn't matter. You're going to trade them the same. So if the market is selling off in the Euro and in gold, you have to look to sell. So Forex, stocks, bonds, it's all one market. Look at this. This is all the same time. This market rallied and these two sold off. This is the 60 minute chart of the dollar versus the yen. And it rallied very strongly. This is bond futures and it sold off very sharply. And this is the e-minis, the stock market. And it sold off very sharply. When the market falls, interest rates rise. If interest rates go up, traders buy bonds. And they need to convert to dollars if they're buying American bonds. And therefore the dollar rallies. Higher interest rates. So less money available to buy stocks. Money costs more. And also CDs become more attractive. So traders take money out of stocks and put them into CDs. You can argue fundamentally what's going on here that it makes sense. The bonds sell off. Interest rates go up. The dollar goes up and stocks go down. I never trade that way. The point I'm making is that all financial markets are related. And if one market is moving, probably all other financial markets are moving as well. Now I'm going to move on and talk about types of charts and timeframes. Price action techniques. They're the same on all charts. The price action is the same on all charts. In general, if a trader starts off, a five minute chart is a good starting point. And they should avoid trading any chart that has more than 20 bars per hour. In other words, a three minute chart if you're talking about a time chart. You can look at this chart. This is a one minute chart. And it looks easy. You say, well, it's going up. I'm going to buy. Buy for a second leg. Going down, I'm going to sell. However, very few traders, even really good traders, can trade it consistently profitably. Because there are too many decisions and there's too little time. Even though the patterns are good, you just don't have enough time and you'll make mistakes. A trader is much better off if trading a higher timeframe chart. Here's a five minute chart. They could trade a 15 minute chart, an hour chart, a daily chart, weekly chart. Wedge bull flag, buy. Double bottom, test of the wedge bottom, buy. Bull breakout, high or low, buy. Wedge rally, sell. So there are several clear signals on a five minute chart. Now what about other types of charts? Like charts based upon the number of shares or contracts, range charts or tick charts. So here are those other alternatives. And you can see the patterns are the same. The shape is not perfectly identical. The point I'm making is it doesn't matter what chart you're looking at. A five minute chart, a range chart, a 10,000 ticks to a bar chart, 25,000 shares to a bar chart. It doesn't matter. You just pick one chart and the price action will be the same. Simply choose the type of chart that you prefer. I prefer time charts so that I can anticipate when a bar is going to close. I know when there are four minutes and 50 seconds, the bar is going to close in 10 seconds. But if I'm trading any of the other types of charts, I cannot anticipate exactly when the bar is going to close. And for me, that creates some anxiety. So I prefer to trade time charts. Now, in terms of time frames, a good way to look at it is simply trade the smallest time frame that you can trade consistently profitably. Again, if you go to a time frame that's too small, you'll make too many mistakes. If you're a scalper, you're only going to hold on to your trade for one bar, two bars, maybe five bars. If you're a swing trader, you're going to hold on to your trade for a lot longer, 10 bars, 20 bars, 30 bars. In general, whether you're a scalper or a swing trader, you should wait until the legs are reasonably good, good size, five or 10 bars and a pretty good number of ticks or pips. Otherwise, it's just too hard to make money. Whenever there's a reversal, I'm always thinking about 10 bars and two legs, TBTL. You don't always get it, but you often do. In general, if I see any kind of reversal, I look at the highest time frame where the pattern is present. So if there's, let's say, a wedge top on the five minute chart, I'll look at the 15 minute chart or 60 minute chart to see if there's also a clear wedge. Then, if I'm looking for a correction, 10 bars, two legs, I expect the 10 bars to be on the highest time frame chart. So if the five minute chart has a wedge and it takes place over 100 bars, and there's also a wedge on the 60 minute chart, and each leg is five to 10 bars, then I look for 10 bar correction on the 60 minute chart. So a day or two of a correction. Here's the wedge bottom on the five minute chart. The wedge had 300 bars. So that's actually several days of trading. Am I only expecting a 10 bar, two legged correction? No. I'm going to go to the highest time frame that has this wedge pattern, and then look for 10 bars on that time frame. For example, maybe I'll look at a 60 minute chart. Here's the 60 minute version of the five minute chart that I just showed. You can still see the wedge, and the legs have five, 10 bars or more. When I see a reversal from the wedge bottom, I'm expecting two legs up on the 60 minute chart, and I'm expecting at least 10 bars up. There's at least five here, at least five here, so the whole pattern has at least 10 bars, has more than 10 bars. But in general, that's my minimum objective for a reversal. So I look for the highest time frame that has the pattern, and then I expect two legs and 10 bars on that highest time frame. And that will obviously have far more bars and probably more legs on the five minute chart. But when I'm looking for the reversal trade, my goal is going to be 10 bars, two legs on the highest time frame. So I don't want to exit too early on the five minute chart. Now what's the best chart if you're trading Forex markets? Well, during active times of the day, like in the middle of the US session or the European session, it doesn't matter what type of chart that you trade. So for example, look at these two charts. They're different charts, but they look pretty much the same during the US session. This is California time. It's between about 530 in the morning until 9 o'clock in the morning. It doesn't matter what type of chart you use. For example, here's a five minute chart, and this chart has 300 ticks per bar. And the charts look the same. Another thing about five minute charts is I can look at a five minute chart all day. And if volume is slow on a tick chart, I have to increase the number of ticks per bar. If volume is very big, I have to decrease the number of ticks per bar. Otherwise, the patterns just don't fit on the screen or they look too small or too big. And with a five minute chart, I do not have to do that. Very often during the quiet hours, like between the end of the US session, Forex trading session, and the start of the Asian session, the market becomes very quiet. You can see we're getting gaps, little dojis, very little trading is taking place here. In fact, the entire time on the five minute chart here, this is the Asian session. Very little is happening. And as an alternative, you can switch to a tick chart. And this pink box is this pink box. Very few trades, so very few ticks. And this is the same time on the tick chart. So sometimes looking at a tick chart, you can see what's going on more easily than you can on a five minute chart. In general, if the five minute chart looks like this, I'm not going to trade on the tick chart or any other chart. I'll just wait. Very often in Forex markets, in between sessions, the markets are really not tradable. And it's better to just wait. The tick charts, they compress the data, but it's still better not to trade when the range is that small and the bars are that small. You can trade a higher timeframe chart, like a 60 minute chart or a four hour chart or a daily chart and plan to hold for a day or more. But I would not be trading five minute charts or 300 tick charts. Again, the dollar versus the Canadian dollar five minute chart. And here's a 60 minute chart. And this pink box on the 60 minute chart is this orange box on the five minute chart. And you can see virtually nothing is happening. You're very tiny sideways bars. And although this looks like it's moving a lot, it's really not moving all that much. This entire range is less than 10 pips. So it's not tradable. I would not trade it. The alternative, look for trades on the 60 minute chart or wait for the five minute chart to become more active again. Or of course, you can always look at other Forex markets. Sometimes one market will be quiet and another one will be pretty active. Now what's wrong with using a very small timeframe? High frequency trading firms are always using very small timeframes and they make a lot of money, or at least a lot of them make a lot of money. And the advantage of a small timeframe is the bars are small, the moves are small, and the risk is small. For example, this is a tick chart. And every tick is plotted on this chart. But you can say, wow, I could buy here and I could sell here and make a lot of money. Well, look at this. The entire range is only three pips tall. So if you're a computer, sure, you can make a pip or two once or twice. But if you're a trader trying to do this manually, you are not going to make money when the entire range is only three pips tall, even though the pattern looks very tradable. You have to be a computer. A person is going to lose money if they try to trade something like that. I've noticed that a lot of websites recommend manual high frequency trading. They don't call it that, but they're talking about trading a one minute chart or a 20 tick chart. That is manual high frequency trading. And the vast majority of great traders cannot make money on that type of trading. Remember, if you're doing this for a career, you're planning on doing it for year after year after year. And very, very few traders can consistently make money on a one minute chart for years at a time. Your account will slowly disappear. Here's a one minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. But look, look at the range. What's the size of the entire range? All kinds of legs up and down. But the entire range is only nine pips tall. If you try to trade this, you will lose money. Don't waste your time. Don't waste your money doing that. What's wrong with the one minute chart? Why does it fail? The risk is small because the bars are small. So you can say, well, I'll buy here and I'll put my stop here. And I'm just risking three pips, two pips, one pip. And when traders start out, they focus on risk. All they care about is avoiding loss. However, you also have to be thinking about probability. And that is a very difficult concept for traders starting out. And if you do not have high enough probability, then it doesn't matter how small your risk is, you will lose money. So the logic is good. If you have a winning system that works on the five minute chart or the 60 minute chart, why not put it on the one minute chart and make money 50 times a day? Well, there are problems with that logic. One of the big problems is time. It takes time to decide to take a trade. It takes time to place the orders, to adjust the orders. And it takes time to manage the trades. And our brains are not built to make that many decisions correctly in such a short period of time. And as a result, traders will make far too many mistakes to make money. Therefore, it's not possible for almost all traders to do this well trading a one minute chart. Remember, if you're doing this for a career, you're planning on doing it day after day, year after year. And it's just really hard to do. You might be able to do it for an hour a day, but to be doing it all day long for years, it's really hard to do. Before trying a one minute chart, I would try to get profitable on a higher timeframe chart, like a five minute chart or a 60 minute chart. If you are profitable on a five minute chart or a 60 minute chart, I would rather have you increase the size of your position than decrease the size of your timeframe. It's a much better idea to increase your position size and you will make far more money doing it that way than reducing your timeframe. Instead of saying, oh, I'm making a thousand dollars a day on a five minute chart. If I switch to a one minute chart, I'll make $10,000 a day. I would say if you're making a thousand dollars a day consistently in a five minute chart, keep trading the five minute chart because you're proving that you're trading it well. And instead of switching to a one minute chart, you're doing the five minute chart well, just increase your volume. For example, here, let's say you got a pretty strong reversal down. You got five, six bars without a bull body. And then you got a follow through bar after a bear breakout, sell the clothes of that follow through bar and exit at the end of the session down here. You make 40 pips profit in the Forex market, the euro versus the dollar. So if you're trading 10,000 units, you can say, well, 10,000 units, I'm only going to make $40 on that trade. Right. But if you do it well enough, long enough, you can gradually increase your position size. And maybe at some point you trade a million units and then you're making $4,000 a day. Years ago, a big problem with all trading was slippage. And traders sometimes worry when they start out. Oh my gosh, if I trade two contracts in the E-mini, can the market handle that while I get slippage? Well, here's some time and sales data. And take a look at this. Here's the size of the most recent trades. And what do you see? You see a lot of trades with hundreds of contracts. Here's a trade with a thousand contracts. And they're not moving the market. Price is barely changing, even a tick. You do not have to worry about trading too big a position size. Slippage in the E-mini is rarely ever a problem. It's a problem with some small stocks, but most major stocks, Apple, Google, Amazon, it's not a problem. And most major Forex markets, it's not going to be a problem either. In this very short window, just a matter of seconds, there was huge volume being traded. So you do not have to worry about getting too big for the market. I have to say one other thing about slippage. When you look at time and sales from a broker, there are all kinds of problems with their time and sales charts. Some charts only show limit orders. Others have mistakes. For example, look at this. 37,000 contracts traded right here. And the market didn't even move a tick. Do you think 37,000 contracts really traded? Of course not. That's probably an order that was filled over the course of an hour or two. And when the final piece of the order got filled, the time and sales showed the fill. Or it could simply be a mistake. In this video, I talked about false beliefs. The most important one is that there are perfect trades. Another important one is that there's a perfect time to enter. There are no perfect setups and you can enter at any time all day long. Because institutions are entering, buying and selling all day long. And then I talked about the big picture. You want to buy low, hoping that the market will go higher. You want to sell high, hoping that the market will go lower. Finally, I talked about the types of charts and the timeframes. It doesn't matter what type of chart that you use. They're all based upon rational human behavior. And they're just representations of the same underlying thing. The trading that is going on. And for timeframes, traders should not be trading on any chart that has more than 20 bars per hour. If you're a day trader, a five minute chart is a good starting point. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on starting out as a trader. It's $21. Sopowder's