 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching The Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on gaps. I'm going to begin by talking about micro gaps. These are very small gaps that most traders do not even realize exist. One type of a micro gap is a gap open bar where the open of a bar is above or below the close of the prior bar. And that often is an indication of what the market is trying to do. And I want to make the point that gaps mean strength. Every trend bar is a breakout. It's also a climax. It's also a spike. But every trend bar is an attempt to break out and therefore it is a gap. We have a trading range. Most breakout attempts fail. Therefore, if you have trend bars up near the top or bare trend bars near the bottom, the breakout attempts will probably fail. Most of the time when you get gaps, they don't have any predictive value because there's no follow through and the market reverses and it continues to do what it has been doing. Here's a subtle gap. Look at the low of this bar and the high of the prior bar. We have a bull trend bar. So it's a breakout. Therefore, I'm always paying attention to what the next bar does. Will its low stay above all the bars to the left? Will its low stay above the high of the bar immediately before the breakout bar? And if it does, like here, this low is above this high, there's a gap. And that's a sign of strong bulls. They're buying above support, the breakout point. And that increases the chances that we're going to get higher prices. And this is what followed. Anytime I see a trend bar, I look at the bar before and the bar after. If they do not overlap, there's a gap. And the odds of follow through in the direction of the trend bar are greater. We have a bear trend bar. I look at the high of the bar after and the low of the bar before. If there's no overlap, there's a gap. That increases the chances that we're going at least a little bit lower. We have a series of bull bars. I look at the bull bar here and I look at the low of the bar after and the high of the bar before. There's a gap. That increases the chances that the market's going at least a little higher. And here's another gap. A big bull trend bar. Therefore, I look at the low of the bar after and the high of the bar before. If there's a gap, it increases the chances that the market's going at least a little bit higher. Gaps are a sign of strength. In a bear trend, a gap down, a sign of selling pressure. In a bull trend, a gap up is a sign of buying pressure. Take a look at here. The low of this bar, we have a gap above this high. And we have another gap here. The low of this bar is at or above the high of this bar. Therefore, it's a gap. But then the market traded below that high and the market traded below this high. The bulls are getting gaps, but the gaps are closing. At this point, we have a gap between this close and the high of that bar. And the gap closed on the next bar. And the same thing here. A gap between the close of this bull bar and the high of the prior bar. But the gap closed on the next bar. We're getting gaps that are closing. And therefore, the bulls are not as strong as they once were. And it reduces the chances that we're going higher. And it increases the chances that the bull trend. And it increases the chances that the bull trend is falling below the breakout points. Pullbacks falling below breakout points. We have a bull trend bar. So a breakout. The high of any of the prior bars is the breakout point. But the gap closed. The pullback fell below the breakout point. That is a sign that the bulls are not nearly as strong as they could be. When gaps start to close in a bull trend, it reduces the chances that the market is going higher. higher and it increases the chances that it might go lower. And now we're getting bear trend bars. Here we have a bear trend bar. So I look at the high of the bar after and the low of the bar before and if there's a gap it increases the chances we're going lower. Another big bear bar. I look at the low of the bar before, the breakout point, and then the high of the bar after we have a gap. We tried to close the gap here but this pullback did not close the gap. The bear trend resumed. The open gap here increases the chances that we're going to go at least a little bit lower. In this particular case we went a lot lower. Five minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. A big bear bar and therefore I look at the low of the bar before, a potential breakout point, and I look at the high of the bar after, a pullback. And here the gap closed. Another big bear bar. I look at the high of the bar after, the low of the bar before, the gap is open. And then we have another gap here. This close and that low. But this gap closed on this bar. It went above that low. The gap between these lows and now this pullback is still open. Good for the bears. And they got a second leg down but we reversed up. And ultimately this gap closed. A big bear bar. You're going to be thinking that we might be trying to form gaps. The close of this bear bar. There's a gap between this close and that low. But the gap closed over here. It was a bear trend but now we're getting gaps that are closing. Bear trend bars. But every time the bears are failing to get a gap. Look at the close of this bar. It could not even close below the low of this bar. So it could not even form a gap. The market's becoming increasingly neutral. The bears are becoming weaker. The bulls are becoming stronger. And we ended up getting a swing up. Every time you get a bull trend bar, you look at the high of the bar before, the low of the bar after. If the gap stays open, it increases the chances we're going a little bit higher. Then we have a series of bars that have gaps. We have a small bull bar. Look at the low of the bar after, the high of the bar before. The gap stayed open. A gap here, this low, that high. This bull trend bar is a gap bar. Another gap bar here. The pullback stayed above the breakout point. Another breakout here. Pullback stayed above this breakout point. And went a little bit below this bar. Just a little. When that happens and it just goes a little bit below, I still call it a gap. But I call it a negative gap. I'll talk more about that later. It's still a sign of strength. But it's not as strong a bull trend as over here where the gaps are staying open. A lot of gaps on the way up increases the chances that the market's going to go higher. If the open of a bar is above or below the close of the prior bar, I call it a gap open bar. Look at this open and that close. They're at the same price. There's no gap. Here's the close of this bar. And the open of that following bar is exactly at the same price. No gap. This bar opened above that close. There's a gap. This bar opened below that close. There's a gap. So bull bar and then a gap down that rallied up. A bull bar and a gap up that rallied up. We have a bull bar and another bull bar. The bull trend is continuing. Open of the second bar above the close of the first bar. And here we've got continuation up. But we had a gap down. Instead of continuation up, bull bar, bull bar, bull bar, bull bar. We have bull bar, bear bar. Bull bar, bear bar. Here we have a gap down. The open of this bar gapped below the close. Here we have a gap up and a reversal down. This bar opened above that close and it reversed down. I'm mentioning these gap bars here. Continuation up. Here bull trend, reversal down. Because they can tell you important information about how strong a breakout is. And if you're getting reversals, you may get lower prices. If you're getting continuation, you're probably going to get higher prices. This is very helpful to scalpers. I pay attention to these gaps because they give me a variety of scalp setups. I talk about that in the videos on scalping. The open of the bar gapped below the prior bar. That's a gap open bar. These are all gap open bars. The open of the bar is not at the same price as the close of the prior bar. So these four bars, one, two, three, four, all had a gap open. Gap up and gap down. Both resumed up. Gap down and gap up. Both reversed down. Instead of the first bar being a bull bar, here the first bar is a bear bar. Here's the close of the bar and we gapped up. We're reversing up. Here we gapped down and we reversed up. In this case, we gapped down and we continued down. We gapped up. This open is above the close of that bar. And we continued down. Two reversal setups with a gap up and a gap down. Two continuation setups with a gap down and a gap up. Again, I pay attention to things like this because there are all kinds of little scalps that I can take based upon what these little gaps are telling me. Do I think the market is going to continue up? Do I think it's going to reverse? If I think it's going to continue up, I'm looking to buy for a scalp. If I see a reversal up with gaps, then I'll be looking for some kind of a buy or maybe a test down to the gap. If I see a continuation down, I'm looking for lower prices and I'm looking to sell. Gap open bars. All four bars opened with a gap compared to the close of the bar before. Gap open bar. Gap open bar. The euro versus the dollar 60-minute chart. The open of this bar is below the close of that bar. We have three consecutive bear bars. Strong selling. What does that tell you? Why did this bar open below the close of that bar? Because a lot of traders, once they saw three consecutive bear bars, decided the market was going lower and they sold the close. As soon as this bear bar closed, a lot of traders hit the button to sell the market. And the result was there were so many traders selling at the close of this bar. This bar opened below. And that tells you that there were a lot of traders trying to sell as soon as this bar closed. That increases the chances that the market's going lower. Same thing here. This open below that close. It tells you that a lot of traders sold at the market as soon as this bar closed. And therefore, the market was likely to go at least a little bit lower, ultimately, and went a lot lower. A pair of very strong bear bars. But look what happened here. We have a gap up and a bull bar. Traders who saw this bear close thought that maybe we're forming a high or low major trend reversal. Head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. And they thought this might be a last attempt by the bears to continue the bear trend. What happened here is so many traders decided that this was a bear trap. A cell vacuum test of support at the top of this bull bicycle bar. That instead of selling the close, they bought the close. You have two strong bear bars. And the next bar opened above that close. That tells you that there were a lot of traders, as soon as they saw this bear close, thought it was a bear trap, trapping traders into selling low. And they thought the market was going to reverse. And therefore, they bought. As soon as this bar closed, they hit buy the market. And this bar opened above that close. When you see that open above the close and the context is good for a potential reversal, traders are going to either buy as soon as that bar closes or as soon as it starts to reverse up. Something's wrong with the bears. If we have a potential for a major trend reversal up and we have consecutive bear bars followed by a gap up, that is not good for the bears. It increases the chances that a whole bunch of traders are buying at the market, even when they see consecutive bear bars. Why would a whole bunch of traders buy at the market when there are consecutive bear bars? Because they think it's a bear trap. It's a test down and that the market actually wants to go higher. Now we have a buy the close bull trend. Look at the open of this bar and the close of that bar. Why is this open above that close? Because so many traders thought the market was going higher. As soon as they saw this close, they hit buy the market. Why is this open above that close or this open above that close? Because as soon as traders saw the bull close, they thought the market was going higher. Everybody hit buy the market. And so many buy orders, the market opened above that close. So a buy the close bull trend with gaps up, the market's probably going at least a little bit higher. If you're looking to swing trade, you can buy. And bull scalpers will buy as well, confident that the probability is high that the market's going to go at least a little bit higher. This is a Euro versus a dollar chart. And the gap open bars are not as common or as useful in forex markets, but they're very useful for traders trading stocks and the E-mini. A gap means strength. We have a breakout and therefore a potential gap. This close and any of these highs. We're reversing down. And therefore there's a gap between this low and the bars to the left. And now we're resuming up. The bottom of this pullback tested the top of this bare bar. It overlapped a little bit with this bull bar high. It did not get down to the top of this bull bar. Therefore, slight negative gap with this high. A perfect breakout test with this bare bar high. And an open gap with the highs of these three bars. And then a bull bar after the breakout. This is probably a bull flag. The market probably is going at least a little bit higher. Which it did. Every trend bar is a breakout. Every trend bar is a buy climax. Every trend bar is a gap. There's a gap between this close and that low. And then once we start to go sideways, there's a gap between the low of the pullback at this point and here. And here we're starting to bounce up. We still have an open gap from this low to that high. And again, an open gap. The bears are unable to get below the breakout point. The pullback is staying above the breakout point. This could lead to a measured move up. We have a double bottom pullback. Testing a breakout point. Even though it's a bare bar, traders will buy above it. Or they'll buy above the bull bar. Looking for a second leg up. And maybe a measured move up. Whenever you get a bull trend resuming, especially when there's a double bottom test of a breakout point and the gap stays open, chances are 60% or higher that we're going up for some kind of a measured move. Bull trend resuming. Not particularly strong. Lots of dojis. Lots of overlap. Lots of bear bars. But still always in long. And look what happened when the market reached a measured move based upon this gap. The bottom of the bull trend. The gap, possibly the middle of the bull trend. When it reached the measured move target, it sold off. That means bulls sold to take profits. And some bears sold for a scalp. Looking at this rally as not very strong. Plus pretty good selling pressure here and here. Therefore, they thought there might be enough profit taking on the part of the bulls for the bears to make money if they sold with the limit order at that high. Looking for a scalp. Bull trend continued up. Fairly tight channel. We have another big bull bar. And potential gap between its close and this high, its close and that high. And the low of any pullback bar. And maybe a prior high like this. The bears are hoping this is an exhaustive end of the move. The bulls are hoping that it's a breakout and part of a small pullback bull trend. A bull trend that constantly looks weak, yet forms gaps and continues up for many more bars. When you look at a breakout like this, you have a potential measuring gap. There are several choices for the bottom of the measured move. For example, this high or low to that gap could lead to a measured move up. This low, maybe even that low. Breakout point. Possibly measured move up. Computers will look at all possibilities. If the market goes above the nearest one, they'll then see what the market does when it reaches the next one. Possibly measured move up from this low to a gap if this gap stays open, or this low to the gap, or this low to the gap. And you can see what happened when the market reached the measured move based upon this low. It went above the measured move based upon this low to the gap. However, it stalled when it reached the measured move from this low to the gap. You can see the bears tried to reverse, tried to reverse. They tried to turn this into an exhaustion bar. Instead, the gap stayed open above this breakout point. This became a measuring gap, and the market stalled at a measured move up from this low to the gap up here. Bulls were taking profits. Aggressive bears might have scalped up here. Small pullback bull trend. Usually better not to sell. Usually better only to look to buy until the market turns into something else, like a trading range. Then traders might sell at prior highs looking for a scalp down. Micro gaps are just very small gaps, and they come in many different types. The close of a bar and prior highs or lows. If they stay open, they are a sign of strength, and they increase the chances that the trend will continue. If the current bar opens above or below the close of the prior bar, I call it a gap open bar, and scalpers will pay attention to gap open bars because they can often take small scalps, either betting on a reversal or a continuation. Gaps mean strength. If gaps are staying open, chances are the trend will continue at least a little bit further. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the third of four videos on gaps. we'll see you next week at the end. Once we break intoausos, we'll see you next week,