 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching The Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading major trend reversal tops. An important thing about tops is that you need strong bears to make a reversal. I'm also going to talk about the minimum targets that you should be considering. When traders are looking for a higher high major trend reversal, they need some evidence that the bears are reasonably strong. Here we have a bull trend and a potential higher high major trend reversal. Look at this. We have a rally lasting a couple of legs, third leg. Chances are once the market's always in long, the first reversal down will be minor, which means it will become either a bull flag or a trading range, not a bear trend. And now we have another strong leg up and therefore any reversal down again will probably be minor. But look at this reversal. It went sideways for about 15 bars or so and it broke below the bottom of the bull channel. And we have a decent bear bar here and a decent bear bar here, two legs down. The bulls lost control of the market for a lot of bars and the bears were strong enough to break below the moving average and stopped the bulls for about 15 or 20 bars. When that's the case, that is enough selling pressure so that traders will suspect that the next year will be a little bit more. We suspect that the next reversal attempt, instead of being minor leading to a bull flag, it might be major and last 20 or more bars and go down for a swing. In addition, not only did the bears stop the bulls for 20 bars, they were strong enough to put a couple of bars completely below the moving average. There's a gap between the high of this bar and the moving average, a gap between the high of this bar and the moving average. If the market's in a bull trend and now the bears are getting strong enough to put bars completely below the moving average, then the bears are reasonably strong. So yes, minor reversal and bull flag and bull trend resumption. But after a gap bars, the market usually tries to form a major reversal and therefore traders will look to sell a reversal down from testing the bull trend high. Here's the top of the bull trend. We're breaking above it and the breakouts failing. Traders will sell below here, betting that there's a 40% chance for a major reversal. The reversal down where the reward is at least twice the risk and usually lasting 20 or more bars. Traders need the minor reversal to be strong if they're going to start looking for a major reversal. And it doesn't have to lead to a big reversal down. It can simply be the bears stopping the bulls for 10 or 20 bars as they did here. That is enough strength on the part of the bears for traders to think that the next reversal attempt might be major and not just a big reversal. Traders need the increase in the interest minor. We have a double bottomed bull flag. Every double bottom is a high two. So a bull trend, bull breakout, bull back, resumption, a double bottom slightly lower low. A double bottomed bull flag, a high two bull flag, 20 or more bars into a bull trend, late in a bull trend. You have to be thinking that the next leg up might be the final leg and that the high two bull flag might become the final bull flag. The final leg here, we have a bull bar, not especially big, bad follow through. Another good bull bar, bad follow through. We have a third bull bar, bad follow through. So even though it's a bull micro channel, no pull backs lasting about eight bars, the rally is not as strong as you might think when you see a bull micro channel. Whenever you get a bull bar and bad follow through and you get several like that, the leg up is probably a bull leg and what would become a trading range and possibly a major trend reversal. We have a double top. I said we have a double bottom. We also have a double top. The market tried to reverse here. Instead, we broke out. And this rally with that bear bar might be a failed breakout above the double top. Anytime you have a double top and then a breakout that starts to reverse, it's a type of a wedge. You have three pushes up, one pull back two for the double top, pull back three. It's three attempts to go higher, even though it does not look like a wedge at all. It's the same forces that operate with a wedge. And therefore, you can expect the same kind of reversal that you can expect with a wedge. There is a wedge in fact here as well. Rallied, sold off, rallied, sold off. And now we're at the top of a channel. Again, if I drew a trend line along the bottom, it wouldn't look very much like a wedge. But it's three pushes up and we're getting a reversal down from the top of the channel. And there's also a parabolic wedge here as well. Bull bar, pause, bull bar, pause, bull bar, reversal. So this is a wedge and it's within a larger wedge. And then we have a breakout above a double top that looks like it's reversing. And that is a type of wedge as well. So smaller wedge patterns inside of a larger wedge pattern. That means nested wedges. That has a higher probability of leading to a reversal. You can also draw a wedge from the low. We have a leg up, pull back, second leg up, pull back, and a third leg up. Again, it does not look like a wedge, but it's three pushes up. Some computers will look at this as the wedge. Other computers will say the wedge is here. Even though this low is below this low. In other words, the first high of the wedge came before the end of the bear trend. It's still a wedge. Markets often transition from bear trends into bull trends. And during the transition, they have components of both. So yes, we're still in a bear trend here. But some traders would say the bull trend began here before the bear trend ended. At least that's how I would look at this. Some computers would also look at this as a wedge. Rally, a pull back, even though it's a pull back below the bull breakout. And then a second leg up, and then a pull back, and then a third leg up. And as I said, there's also a parabolic wedge. Many ways to draw a wedge all reversing at the same point. Nested wedges increase the probability that you'll get at least a couple legs sideways to down. We have a negative gap. We have a high here, and then we pull back below it. We pull back below it a little bit as well. Some overlap of this training range with this training range. However, the overlap is not especially great, and therefore, this can lead to a measured move up. Whenever you get a pull back below a breakout point, I view that as a negative gap. So instead of an actual gap, I call it a negative gap. Here's an actual gap. This low, that high, no overlap. There's a gap here between this low and the bi-signal bar high. That is a gap. Here, we have overlap between the breakout point and the pullbacks. Negative gap. But it still often leads to a measured move. And therefore, I'm always drawing lines to see how the market behaves near that resistance. And you can see the market's trying to reverse. This is a good-looking sell signal bar, a bear bar closing on its low. That further increases the probability that the bears will get at least a minor reversal. Selling here, you probably have about a 40% chance of a swing down. It's a fairly strong bull trend here. We have about an 8 bar, 9 bar bull micro channel. And we do not have a micro double top. However, if you want higher probability, you wait for maybe three or four consecutive bear bars. At this point, we have a higher probability of at least a small second leg down. It's reasonable to take this short. The risk is to just above the high of the bar. You might use a wider stop in case there's one more small leg up. But the risk is small compared to the potential reward. Even though the probability of a swing down is only 40%, the reward is sufficiently big to offset the lower probability. The market's clearly still always in long at this point. And that is why the probability is only 40% that the reversal will be successful. If you wait for three or four consecutive bear bars or a pair of decent bear bars closing on their lows, and then sell either that close or above these bars, looking for at least a small second leg down, the probability can be 60% or more that you'll get some kind of a swing down. At this point, the market probably is always in short, meaning that the bears have taken control, and we're probably going at least a little bit lower. If you short here, your stop is further away. Your risk is greater. Your reward is less because you're entering after the bear trend has already begun. But the probability of making money has gone up. And that's the trade off. Whenever you enter when the trade has higher probability, your risk reward is always worse. You never get high probability with good risk reward. You get one or the other, but never both. There has to be a reason for an institution to take the other side of the trade. Any time you take a trade, you have to have a plan on how to take profits. I always operate with the idea of a minimum profit. What's the smallest profit that I need to have a positive trader's equation? What's the smallest profit that I can go for so that the math makes sense and I should take the trade? We're getting late in the day. Traders will look for reasons to take profits, especially since the rally is not particularly strong. On any trade, the minimum target is always two times the actual risk. If you sold below the low of this bar, you enter on this bar, you actually only had to risk to above the high of this bar. So you risked very little. Mathematically, it's always reasonable to take profits at two times your actual risk. However, if two times your actual risk is smaller than the minimum scalp, that does not make sense. Also, the minimum reward is rarely the best reward. The minimum is just the minimum needed to make the trader's equation positive. Like anything in life, going for a minimum is not always the best choice. And if you're taking profits consistently at the minimum level, that is not a good thing. When the actual risk is very small like this, it's better to be looking at the initial risk. If you sold below the low of this bar, your initial stop is above its high, and that generates your initial risk. That's your initial risk. And taking a reward, at least partial profits at two times your initial risk, makes sense mathematically. That's better than two times actual risk when the actual risk is tiny like it is here. Also, you're taking profits around a 50% pullback. The bull trend might resume. And you're also taking profits at the moving average. So it's reasonable here to take profits at two times the initial risk. You're also at the bottom of the final buy climax bar, and the market often pauses or even resumes up at that point. We have a bear spike, a bear breakout, second push, third push. And now we're getting a second reversal up, first reversal up, second reversal up. And we're getting near this low, the bottom of the final bull leg. We might be entering a trading range. We're also getting late in the day. It's reasonable to take profits here as well. The final possibility is holding until the end of the session. Here we have a double top bear flag. And we may get a collapse into the close. We probably will not. It looks like this was resistance. We turned down and then it became support, support. We're probably in a support level. And we probably will not break strongly down. But it's reasonable to hold short until the close, just in case we do. Theoretically, if a bull got out above this high or that high, and he's trading always in, he always wants to stay in the market. He has to sell again below a reasonably strong bear bar, which is below this bar. The market's still always in short. It did not become always in long here. So if he's trading always in, he has to sell again here. And then he would get out at the end of the session. Whenever there's a third push up, traders have to be prepared to sell a breakout. We're trying to get a bull breakout above a bull channel. 75% chance it's going to reverse within about five bars. Here it reversed within a couple of bars. If you have a channel that's reasonably broad, the legs going down, lasting five or ten bars, then selling the reversal down makes sense. If the channel up is extremely tight like this, selling a reversal down does not make sense. Probably the reversal will be minor and the best the bears will get is sideways. Again, if the channel is very, very tight like this, the first reversal down is probably minor. You're not going to make much profit if you make any profit at all. The same right here, probably not much profit. But here, the bare legs are lasting 15 bars, five or ten bars. And traders are making money selling at prior highs. If they sold this high and sold more higher, they would make money. The pullback here fell below the breakout point. Chances are, if you're selling here above these highs, at a minimum, will pull back below the breakout point. We have a bull trend, fairly tight bull channel. We sold off about ten bars or so. Possibly this is a double top, lower high, major trend reversal. It's reasonable to take that short. It would be better if this bar had a bare body and if we had more selling pressure. Micro double top, that's good. That increases the probability of success. But this rally up to this bar is about nine bars without a pullback. This is the first reversal down. The first time a bar went below the low of the prior bar. That makes this a lower probability short, even though it's a micro double top and a lower high, major trend reversal. Bull channel, very tight. On a higher timeframe chart, this would be a series of bull trend bars. And this would be a very brief breakout. We have one bare bar. If you take this one bare bar out of the chart, there's really not much selling at all. Again, a ten bar bull micro channel. Probably the first reversal down will be minor and the bulls will try to get resumption up. And then additionally, the sell single bar has a bull body. Again, low probability sell. This bare breakout is below a tight trading range, but it's a one bar bare breakout. And look at the follow through bar. The next bar has a bull body and the bar after that has a bull body. This looks like a failed bear breakout. That is not much selling pressure. We went sideways for about ten bars, but the bars are small and the pullback is small as well. Therefore, there's not much sign that the bears are particularly strong. If you want higher probability, better to wait for more selling pressure or for a strong bear breakout and then sell after you see a very big bear breakout. And you can see what happened. Instead of a reversal down, we have a small double bottom bull flag and trend resumption up. If you had shorted below this bull bar, the market is still always in long and never became short here. The bears did not get follow through. And therefore, if you sold below here, you have to exit above a bull bar. We have a double bottom bull flag and trend resumption up. We have a bull flag here, a break above the bull flag, and then a small bull flag after this breakout. You have to get out of your shorts here because this is exactly where bulls will get long again. If the bulls exited below this tight trading range with this bear bar, they'll buy again above a bull bar, above here, above here. If the bulls exited below this micro double top, it's still always in long. Therefore, they have to buy again above a bull bar and they have a bull bar here. You cannot continue to hold short if the market is telling the always in bulls to get long. Bull trend, bear breakout, higher high. Is this a higher high major trend reversal? Well, look at this channel. We're up for 30 more bars. I think you have to start the process over and look at this as a new bull trend. And this is not much selling pressure. And therefore, this is probably a minor reversal. You can say it's a second entry short and went below this bull bar, tried to resume with this doji, and now we're getting a second entry short. I would not call this a higher high major trend reversal. I would call it a minor reversal. And more likely, we're going to go sideways rather than down. 20 bars in a very tight bull channel. I would call this a resumption of the bull trend. I would view this as a new bull trend. And therefore, I would need another sign of strength by the bears, a resumption of the bull trend, and a failure around the prior high. This reversal is more likely minor and it probably will become a bull flag. The bull flag and the bull trend will probably resume. Whenever you've got a trend resumption lasting 20 or more bars, start the process over again. You have to again look for some sign of strength by the bears. If you did sell this and you were stopped out within five bars and then there's another sell signal later, that would be a higher probability sell. But that's not what's happening here, at least not yet. This is a strong bull trend, a tight bull channel. Chances are we're going higher. Eventually, every trend ends. However, there's no reasonable sign of a top yet. And a lot of times the market will make several attempts to reverse before it succeeds. Trying to reverse here, here, here, again here. But none of it is strong enough to lead to a trend reversal. Now, this is good for the bears. They have a strong leg down, lasting 10 or so bars with many bear bars, some big bear bars. After this, traders will look to sell a major trend reversal around this high. Maybe here, but you've got three bull bars, one pretty big. Maybe here, three more bull bars, not very good. But here, we have a bear bar closing in its low. We have another bear bar closing in its low, a micro double top and a wedge. This would be a higher probability short for a major trend reversal. Reasonable to sell on a stop below the low of that big bear bar. We have a micro double top and we have a wedge higher high. And we have good selling pressure on the part of the bears. And we have three pushes up. One, two, three. Reasonably good break up below the bull trend line. And trend resumption up. Even though we have a lot of bull bars, we're getting some hesitation on the way up. And we have a wedge rally. If you do sell below this bear bar, it's reasonable to put your stop just above the high of that bar. That is your initial risk from your entry below this bear bar right here to your stop just above. In this particular case, that's 10 ticks. This is a fairly tight channel and a new leg up, but it's within a broader channel. And you're getting much more selling pressure here, here, here. Therefore, there's a higher probability that the bears will finally get a major reversal. A couple legs and 20 or more bars down. Lots of prominent tails. All representing balance between the bulls and the bears. Bulls are selling at the highs of a lot of these bars. Bears are selling at prior highs. We're getting increasing selling pressure. And nested wedge. We have a wedge one, two, three. And reversing down. You can also draw the wedge one, two, three. Trying to get a bull break out above the wedge. You can draw the wedge one, two, or two and three. Or one, two, three. I talked about tops needing strong bear bars. They need some evidence that the bears are strong enough to take control. And then I talked about minimum targets when you're taking profits. You should always go for at least two times your actual risk. And if your actual risk is small, then go for two times initial risk to take partial or full profits. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading major trend reversal tops.