 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading major trend reversal tops. In this video, I'm going to talk about lower high major trend reversals. We have a gap up, which is a type of a bull trend, even though it's only a gap and very brief. If you look at the cash index, you would see a big bull trend bar from here up to here. And therefore, it's a strong bull trend, a strong breakout. While the bulls were strong enough to create a big gap up, they were not strong enough to get good follow through buying. We have 11 bars down, many good sized bear bars, consecutive bear bars here, three bear bars here, two closing on their lows, both with good sized bear bodies. This is pretty good selling pressure, a pretty good sign that the bears are reasonably strong, despite the big gap up. And because that's the case, the market might be in a trading range instead of a bull trend. And if it's in a trading range, a rally up in that range could lead to the beginning of a bear trend reversal. The market's rallying and we have a low two short, low one here, low two there, but a very tight bull channel. And usually when you get a reversal down in a very tight bull channel, the reversal is minor. Is this a lower high major trend reversal? Of course, we have a bull trend. We have pretty good selling pressure and now we're rallying to a lower high. However, because it's in a very tight channel, it's more likely a minor reversal and unlikely to lead to a bear trend at this point. For the bears, they can take this sell, but the probability is not yet particularly high because this channel is tight. For the bears, they see this as a double top with either this high or the top of this sell climax. Very often when you get a sell climax like this and you get a reversal, the market tries to get a little bit above the top of the sell climax. And the bulls who bought the sell climax will take profits there. And the bears know the bulls will take profits and the bears start to sell there as well. This is also about a 50% pullback from what the bears hope is the start of a bear trend. Both are reasonable reasons for traders to start to look too short. If they take that short, their initial stop is at the top of the strong bear leg. Here, the market did sell off and many bears, because they think we have big up, big down, big confusion and a trading range. If they sell here, we'll take profits around this low, thinking that we might get a double bottom and then a leg up in the trading range. The initial target for these bears is this low. In general, when you trade a major trend reversal, you have about a 40% chance of a swing profit. This is a good example of that. Despite the very tight bull channel, the bears were able to get down to a new low. In fact, they even got lower. And had they held, they would have had a reward that was many times greater than the risk. They sell below this bar. Stop probably up here because we might get one more or two more pushes up after a very tight bull channel. Yet, the math is worth it. Their initial risk is up here. Their actual risk, had they sold below this low, would have been one tick above the high of this bar. So the actual risk was tiny. And the reward at this point, partial profits at the new low, several times greater than the actual risk. And the final profit, if they exited down here or at the end of the day, would have been many, many times greater than their actual risk. And therefore, taking a trade that only has a 40% probability of success makes sense. Even if you get a swing profit only 40% of the time, it more than offsets the low probability of the trade. This is also a good example of how a reversal that's probably going to be minor is sometimes major. And therefore, it is reasonable to take the short and hold it for a swing. If you want a higher probability trade, instead of taking this short, you wait for a strong bear breakout with pretty good follow through. And unfortunately, you did not get that anywhere down here. We have a bear breakout to a higher low. It failed. And then we have gaps this high, that low. Another attempt to get back above this low. And it's unsuccessful. A trader who notices that the limit order bulls who bought at this low were unable to get out with a profit. We did not get above the low here, did not get above the low here. And now we have a double top bear flag. This is, I think, a higher probability short. Because now you have a gap and you have trapped bulls who are desperately hoping for any kind of a rally to get out without a loss. And they will give up. Usually they'll give up when a low two triggers after the gap. Low one, low two. Low one, low two. As I said, the actual risk was tiny. It's from your entry price one tick below this bar, to one tick above that bar. That's all you had to risk to take this trade. You did not know that when you put the trade on. But once the trade starts to go your way, you do know that your actual risk was very, very small. Once you get a new low and there's reasonably good momentum in the sell off, here, a very tight bear channel. Traders will change their stop from up here to above this high. Because they'll see this as a major lower high. As long as the market stays below a major lower high, the bears have a chance of a continued bear trend. The bulls wanted to get a double bottom here. They tried, but they failed. And the market continued down. Therefore, another target on the downside is a measured move down from the potential double bottom. If the market did rally from this double bottom and broke above this lower high, traders would be looking for a measured move up. Whenever there's a potential double bottom like this, and instead of going up, it goes down, traders will look for a measured move down. And you can see what happened when the market fell to a measured move down. There were profit takers and that led to this reversal. This reversal ended up forming simply a double top bear flag with this high. This is a reasonable place to take profits, either final or partial profits. We're at a measured move target and we have a potential final flag, a low 2, late, and a bear trend. We might get a bounce up. Because the channel is so tight, the reversal up will probably be minor. However, it could go up fairly far. Because we're at a significant support level, a measured move. Plus, we're testing yesterday's close and yesterday's low. And we have a potential final flag. And if you want, you can look at it as a wedge. Three pushes one, two, three. Is this a major lower high? We have a strong breakout and a new low. But this is not much of a rally. Therefore, this might not be particularly major lower high. When I look to the left, the most important lower high is still here. is still here. So theoretically, the bears can hold short even if we break above this high and this high, relying on this as their major lower high. During this rally, the bears still have a reasonable argument that we're in a broad bear channel as long as the rally does not get above this high. Again, this is a minor high. This is a minor high. This is a minor high. Because there was only a brief reversal up before the new low, I viewed this as part of this bear channel and this as the beginning of the leg down. If you look at a higher timeframe chart, a tight bear channel like this is just a series of trend bars, bear trend bars. So this is still a breakout phase even though we're getting repeated reversal attempts on this chart. Do the bears get out on the stop above here? Well, I think if you're thinking about getting out above a minor reversal, it's better to get out maybe here, a second reversal up. First reversal up, pullback. Second reversal up, sell climax, late and a bear trend, a potential final flag. Therefore, if I'm choosing whether to get out early or late up here, those are my reasonable choices. This is not a reasonable choice. Because if the market goes above here, a minor high, it's probably not going to lead to a bull trend. It's probably only going to lead to either a trading range or a double top bear flag, which it did here. So this is not a really good exit location. If you're thinking about exiting before it gets above a major lower high, it's better to exit on the reversal up early and then look to sell again on a reversal down. I sometimes refer to this as a skunk stop. Because skunks get killed when they're in the middle of the road. And the middle of the road is either taking the early exit or the wide exit and taking any of these minor exits in between is going to cost you money. Whenever the market's in a trend like this, bears will get out on reversals. Some bears might get out up here. I would not. If anything, I would be looking to sell again because it's only a minor lower high. Had a bear gotten out, he would have to look to sell again. And typically, he'll sell below a bear bar. And here's a bear bar or here's a bear bar. Those are two reasonable locations for the bears to sell again. If you sold for any reason here or below here, and you conclude correctly that the market's always in short, and then the market tries to reverse with the minor reversal, if you get out, here's another second entry reversal. First entry, second entry. You have to sell again below a bear bar, especially a second entry. Here's a first entry. Here's a second entry. And this one has a bear bar. This is where the bears sell again. And this is where the bulls who bought give up. They might buy above here. Maybe they buy above here. But when they see the bear trend resuming down a second time, they exit. And that usually is a profitable trade for the bears. A low, two, short, and a bear trend. This is an impressive breakout on the part of the bears. You have seven bars without a bull body. You have four bear bars with decent sized bear bodies. And it's the strongest series of bear bars occurring at least 20 bars into the trend. At least since here. And when you have the strongest bear breakout occurring late in a bear trend, it's more likely an exhaustive move. And the bears need to take a break. They'll buy back their shorts and look to sell again later. The top of that sell climax is a magnet. And therefore, traders know that at this point, the market's probably going to try to test this high. It probably will close the gap between these lows and these highs, which it did. Probably will get to this high. And the bulls who bought for a scalp betting on a minor reversal will take profits. And the experienced bears will sell again, arguing that even though it might be always in long here, it's still in a broad bear channel unless it gets above a major lower high. The same thing here. We have four consecutive bull bars, two with good bodies closing on their highs. The market might be always in long, but the reversal is minor because it's coming after a 10 or 11 bar very tight bear channel. Here always in long. Here probably always in long. But unless you're trying to form a series of higher lows and higher highs, this always in long and this always in long can still be in a broad bear channel. And therefore, bears will look to sell the reversal back down, especially below a bear bar. Here we are at the end of the day. We have a bull bar closing on its high. Most bears would exit on a stop above the high of that bull bar. And if they did not, they would exit a few seconds before the end of the day. A lot of traders never worry about picking an exact top or an exact bottom. They use wide stops and they scale in. Pretty good selling pressure. A tight bear channel, 11 bars down, three consecutive bear bars closing near their lows. Again, the sell climax, so the top of the sell climax is a target. Think about what's going on here. We have a gap up, very good for the bulls, and then an 11 bar bear channel with several bear bars closing on their lows. Good for the bears. We have big up, big down. That creates big confusion and we're probably going to go sideways for a while. You can argue that we were sideways all the way to here. Also for the bulls, this is about a 50% pullback from this gap up and it's a breakout test of this prior high. So it's on a support level. Traders expect a bounce. However, after big up, big down, they expect big confusion, which means the trading range. And that means they expect the first rally to not lead to a bull trend. They expect it to be sold and for the market to test back down. What they don't know is will it form a double bottom and the bull trend will resume from a double bottom bull flag, bull trend, double bottom and a resumption up. Or will this lower high be the start of a bear trend, a lower high major trend reversal? What they do know is big up, big down, big confusion and therefore probably a trading range for 20 or more bars. And that means that any rally will be a bull leg in a trading range and it should be followed by a bear leg in the range. But it might be a lower high major trend reversal leading to a bear trend. In either case, traders are going to look to sell rallies. A very tight channel like this, probably the first reversal down will be minor and bulls will buy it. And they did try to buy it. They bought it here. They bought it here. They bought it here. But not enough bought it to create the double bottom. And instead, we ended up trending down. We have three consecutive bear bars, two with big bodies and all three closing on their lows. This is a bear breakout. Even though we reversed up to above the top of that bear breakout, it's still strong enough to make the market always in short. Some bulls will see this as always in long. However, this is a strong enough sell off to make traders believe it's always in long. And the first reversal up will probably form a lower high and will probably come back down to test this close at a minimum at some point within 10 or 20 bars. If a trader sold the absolute worst price like this close, if he manages this trade well, he'll still make money. He knows the channel down is tight and therefore the first reversal up is probably minor and that the market will probably test it. Back down to this area. So even if he sells his clothes and uses a stop above the top of the sell off, he can make money if he sells more higher, like at a 50% pullback or on a reversal down. And then he can exit part or all at his original price. He gets out break even for his entry down here. And he exits with a profit if he sold more here. That's for a scalper. A swing trader would hold until there's a clear reason to buy again. Strong bull trend, strong bull breakout, but one bar final flag, a pause bar. You can argue power block wedge, one, two, three, a small double top, possibly a second leg trap. This looks like a bull leg in a trading range. And then suddenly we get an exceptionally strong bull leg. Strong bull breakout and it failed. I talk more about this in the videos on trading failed breakouts and climactic reversals and in the videos on trading the open. Remember, this is early in the day. The day is just starting. We have a very strong breakout on the open. 50% of the time, if you get a strong breakout up or down on the open, it's the wrong way and it will reverse. As strong as this is, do not assume that it's the start of a bull trend. 50-50 chance it is. 50-50 chance it'll be an opening reversal. Rally to some resistance level. We don't see any right here. And then an early high of the day leading to a bear trend. For the bears, they're going to take a chance. They see pretty good reversal down here. We have five consecutive bear bars here. A decent sized bear bar here. Good follow through here. Traders who see this see big up and pretty big down. And therefore they expect a trading range. That means that traders will sell any rally after this much of a reversal down. Some traders will sell for a scalp. Others will take a chance that it's a lower high major trend reversal. And that this is simply a bull trap on the open. And that this is the start of a bear trend day. So it's reasonable to short, especially below a bear bar. You can call it a wedge if you'd like. One push up, pause. Second push up, pause. Third or fourth push up. And now we have a micro double top. And it's a breakout test of the bears who sold below here or here. Possible lower high major trend reversal. Forty percent chance traders will get a swing down. In general, you could put a stop here because of the micro double top. But a lot of traders would keep their stop up here at the top of the bear leg. Just in case we go up a little bit higher. So, if you sold below the low of this bar, your initial risk, if you put the stop here, would be from your entry price here to there. So it would be that height. And this would be two times your initial risk. If you were to sell here and exit here, you would be getting out with two times your initial risk. And initial risk is always bigger than actual risk. And therefore, you'd be getting out with at least two times actual risk. And the math would be okay. So it would be okay to sell here and take profits here. That would be the minimum mathematical thing to do. So when the initial risk is small, as it is here, you sell below here. If you put the stop here, your initial risk is small. It's usually good to go for a profit that is at least twice your initial risk. Mathematically, all you have to do is go for a target that is twice your actual risk to have a positive trader's equation. However, if the actual risk is tiny, going for a reward that small is probably not the best decision. I always make the analogy to working for a minimum wage. Is it acceptable? Sure. But is it ideal? Should that be your goal? No. And the same is true with trading. There are things that mathematically make sense. However, if they're minimums, they're not necessarily the best. Whenever there's a strong buy climax like this, there's a big magnet at the bottom of the buy climax and the bottom of the bull leg. And therefore, some traders who take this short will hold looking to take partial profits at the bottom of the buy climax. Also, we have a developing trading range. If you want, you can call it a double top. You can call it a wedge rally. Swing traders should always be looking for swing targets. And usually when you take the trade, the targets seem unrealistic. And what you're saying is, well, maybe I only have a 40% chance of reaching those reasonable targets. And that's okay, because the targets usually are many times greater than your risk. And if you win only 40% of the time, you will make money. You can look at this as a wedge. If we get a bear break up below the wedge, maybe we'll fall for a measured move down. You can look at it as a double top. Here's the neckline. Here's the measured move down. You could look at it as simply a trading range. And if we get the breakout, maybe we'll fall for the measured move down. If we do get to this measured move, it's very close to the bottom of this bi-climax, which is also a magnet, we'll probably get down here as well. And therefore, you might, instead of taking profits at the measured move target, hold for a test of the bottom of the bi-climax. The market often makes a two-legged move, a leg one pullback leg two measured move, and it comes out here around that measured move target. So it looks like some bears will be taking profits around here. And you can see what happened when it got down to the measured move target. It reversed up. It also fell a little bit more than the leg one leg two target. It never reached down here. If you did not exit partially with the limit order here, if you did not exit partially at two times your initial risk, you have to be thinking about exiting above this bull bar. You have a micro double bottom, a bull bar closing on its high, a failure to get all the way down to the bottom of the bi-climax. Remember, the bulls are hoping today's a bull trend day. When they see this and then this, they start thinking, OK, it's probably not going to be a bull trend day, but maybe it can be a trading range day, which means a very deep pullback and then a test back up near the high of the day. And therefore, bulls are looking to buy. And they especially want to avoid the market falling below the bottom of that bi-climax. Because if it does, then the bears have a reasonable chance at a continued trend down. If you see the reversal up with a bull bar closing on its high, most bears, if they did not get out here, will get out there. Even if they were hoping to get out here or here, they know there's too much risk that this could be a second leg trap in a trading range day. First leg down and then an even stronger second leg down. And then we're trying to reverse up. So for the bulls, it's a high two bull flag. Leg one pullback, leg two, and a higher low. So buying back shorts above this bar makes sense. The bulls still are above the bottom of the bi-climax. And it's possible that this is the start of a big bull trend. More likely, big up, big down, big confusion, and the day will end up as a trading range. And whatever rally we get will be a bull leg in that trading range. Also, the bear trend might resume. It did not, but it might. Strong rally and reversal down, but did not get below the bottom of the bull breakout. And therefore, it could simply be a deep pullback. Instead of a bear trend, we could end up in a trading range. At this point, traders are hoping for a bull trend. And they're confident that the first reversal down to here or here probably will be bought. Always reasonable to take half off at two times initial risk. Always reasonable to take part or all off at measured move targets. Always reasonable to take part or all off at the bottom of the bi-climax or the bottom of the strong bull leg. But if it gets to any of the reasonable targets and starts to reverse up strongly, it's usually good to exit and then look to sell again higher if you're still interested in selling. Some traders would have a limit order to take profits at the measured move, at least partial profits there. And you can see a lot of traders did that. That's what created this tail. And then once the traders saw this tail, a lot of traders said, uh oh, maybe I should have taken profits at that measured move target. I'm going to place my order a little bit higher. The traders who did not exit here, a lot of them placed a order a little bit higher to take their profits. And that's what caused that. The bulls also saw that they were able to do this and they got confidence that maybe we'll stay above the bi-climax low. And they decided to buy more aggressively after they saw this reversal up. They bought below this bear bar and enough traders bought both bulls and bears. Bears bought to buy back shorts. Bulls bought hoping for a swing up and enough traders bought so that we did get a reversal. For the bulls, it's still above the bottom of the bi-climax and therefore a higher low and what they hope is a bull trend. But after big up, big down trading range, much more likely. Bare leg in a trading range usually means you're going to get a bull leg in a trading range. So it's reasonable to buy to go long. We have a bull trend and then a trading range. We have a bull breakout above the range. If you want, you can call it a higher high major trend reversal. Then we got a reversal down, but then again, another reversal up. This entire 50 bars is in a trading range and it's getting many reversals and most reversals fail. This top failed, this top failed, this one failed, this one failed. And now we're trying to resume up. We had a double bottom, another double bottom, did not go very far. We're trying to reverse up here, did not go very far. In a trading range, most breakout attempts fail and you get repeated reversals. There are different ways to look at this. You can call it a wedge, one, two, three, and a bull breakout above the wedge that failed and reversed down. You can call it simply a trading range and a higher high major trend reversal, a parabolic wedge, one, two, three. In any case, we're trying to rally strongly and we are reversing. Lots of selling pressure here, here, and then especially here and here. This is enough selling pressure so that the bears have a reasonable chance of getting a trend down. The bulls have a trend up and now it's very balanced and the bears are very strong. Therefore, traders will start to look for a swing down. A strong break below the bull trend line and a wedge rally up, down, up, down, up, and starting to go down. A two bar reversal, a bear bar closing on its low. If you want, some traders will look at it as a double top, lower high. In any case, it is a lower high major trend reversal and it's a reasonable swing short. The worst the bears expect is a continued trading range and a test near the bottom of the range. And they're hoping that it's the first of many lower highs and the short of a bear trend. If you take this short, it's reasonable to put your stop just above the high. We have a wedge and a good bear bar or you could put your stop above the top of the bear trend or what they hope is the top of the bear trend. If you short below this bear bar, I don't like to short below bull bars. I prefer to short below a bear bar closing on its low. So this is where I would short. If I shorted and I used a stop here, my initial risk would be the height of this brown box. And two times my initial risk would be here. And that's always a reasonable location to take partial or full profits, especially since it's at the bottom of a 50 bar trading range. Trading ranges tend to reverse at new lows and reverse at new highs. And therefore, there's a pretty good chance we'll get some kind of a bounce up down here. Mathematically, it's good to take profits at two times initial risk. Remember, the minimum reward that you want is two times actual risk. Had you sold below this bar, you would have been filled here. If the market goes down, your actual risk is only right here. Exiting with two times actual risk is probably too small given the size of the legs here. A bear who sold here, trying to exit at two times initial risk, has a limit order to buy back his shorts here. Or he may simply place a limit order to buy back his short here, thinking that we're at the bottom of the range and it could reverse up. What do you do when the market is trying to go down, trying to go down, trying to go down, trying to go down, trying to go down, trying to go down, but losing momentum. And the bear bars are getting smaller. We're starting to get bull bars closing on their highs here, here, here. And we've been in our trading range for 50 bars. This is a problem for the bears. They have a bear spike and a pullback. They're hoping for a channel, three pushes down, one, two, three. And what they got was three pushes down, one, two, or two and three, but they could not get below this low. And this is starting to base out and starting to go horizontal. Very strong bear breakout, terrible follow through, more bad follow through for the bears, more bars closing on their highs, bad follow through. Here, we have a bear bar and a doji bar, a bear bar and a bull bar, a bear bar and a bull bar. Therefore, there's a lot of bad follow through for the bears on the way down. There's bad follow through for the bulls on the way up. Bull bar, bear bar, bull bar, bear bar. Bull bar, bear bar, bull bar, bear bar. Trading range behavior. And now we're starting to get trading range behavior again after what the bears hoped was a lower high major trend reversal and a strong breakout. And they hope this was the start of a bear trend, but terrible follow through. Bottom of the range. What do you do? You took the short thinking 40% chance of a swing down. Now, this is making you wonder if your premise is correct. If you begin to think that your premise is no longer valid, you have to exit your trade. And it's reasonable to exit here. We have a wedge bottom, a higher low, terrible follow through after the initial sell off. So it's reasonable to exit here. And is that a scalp profit or a swing profit? It doesn't matter. It's not what you hope to get, but it's a small profit. I would call that a break even trade or a small profit trade. But that's what you get 60% of the time when you trade major trend reversals. You don't get a swing trade. You either get a small profit or a small loss. The market continued sideways and we're reversing up a third time. First reversal up, second reversal up, third reversal up in a sideways market. And therefore, it's a triangle. And we're reversing up from the bottom of the triangle. Another bear breakout attempt to a higher low, followed by a bull inside bar. Some bulls would buy above the high of that bar and get filled here. Others would wait for a second entry and buy above this bar and get filled here. I talked about lower high major trend reversals in this video. And like all major reversals, they have about a 40% chance of leading to a swing profit. By a swing profit, I mean at least two times your actual or initial risk. Usually you're looking for at least two legs and 20 or more bars. You get that about 40% of the time if you pick the right entries. Getting that only 40% of the time greatly offsets the low probability. It's a profitable strategy. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading major trend reversal tops.