 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of six videos on channels. I'm going to begin by using the Forex market to show examples on how to draw bear channel lines. And then I'll move on to the E-mini market and I'll talk about examples on how to draw bull channel lines. With any chart, I'm always looking for reversals. Here we reversed up, we reversed up again. So we have two points and I can draw a line. Here we went up and then down. So we reversed down. We reversed down again. I can draw a line across the top. The market might be in a broad bear channel. It might be in a bull trend. As soon as there are two reversals, I like to draw lines. So for example, let's take a look at the bear possibility here. We reversed down. So I'll start by drawing a line connecting this high and that high for possible bear trend. I could also draw the bull trend line and I might later on. You'll see right now I'm using this to draw a possible bear channel. Again, two reversals, I can draw a line and I begin to look for a possible bear trend. In this case, big swings up and down, possible broad bear channel. As soon as I have one line, I like to create a parallel and then drag it to the lowest point in between to get an idea of what a channel might look like. In general, I'm looking initially for channels that are fairly parallel. So creating a parallel of this line and then dragging it down to the lowest point in between gives me an idea of where possible support might be. If this is a bear trend, we go up and down. It will tend to find support at the bottom of the channel. And if it's a bear trend, most bear trends, at least at some point, are contained in a fairly parallel channel. Reversal down, reversal down, two points. I draw a line. I create a parallel. Drag it to the lowest point in between. And now we have a possible broad bear channel. What will the market do if it gets down to this blue line? Will it break strongly through it? Will it bounce up and test the upper line? We got near it and we reversed up. In fact, we did not even fall below this low. We have a higher low. So now we have a double top. Most double tops are not perfect. The second high is usually below or above the first high. We also have a double bottom. A slightly higher low double bottom, but still a double bottom. Are we in a bear trend? Well, yes, we're getting lower highs. Are we in a bull trend? Sure, we're getting higher lows. That also means that we're in a trading range. We reversed up. We reversed up again. Whenever I see two reversals, I'm going to draw a line. Every bar that gets added to the chart gives me new information. And with every piece of additional information, I update what I think will happen with the bars to the right that I do not yet see. I have two reversals up. I can draw a line. Now, are we reversing down here? We might be. So at this point, I'm thinking about a possible line connecting this reversal down and that reversal down. We have three reversals down. One, two, three. Whenever the market's in a trading range like this and there are three reversals either down or up, it's also in a triangle breakout mode. At this point, it's in a bear trend. We have lower highs. It's also in a bull trend. We have higher lows. And whenever it's both in a bull trend and a bear trend, it's in a trading range. If the market trades down here and you look to the left and say, well, where did that bear trend begin? You would say that it began right here. So we are in the early stages of a bear trend. On the other hand, if the market ends up here, you'll say, oh, well, the bull trend began over here. So this is also in a bull trend. Very common for the market to be both in a bull trend and in a bear trend at the same time. And sometimes the probability of each is about the same as it is here in a triangle. I said every time I get a reversal, I think about drawing a new line. I have a reversal up here. I can draw a line using this low and that low or this low and that low. And I pay attention to both. At this point, you don't know which line will be more important. And now we have four lines below. We have this one. We have these two new ones and then that one. All of them might be important. Right now, clearly, these two are important. But I leave all on until it's clear that one or more is no longer important. Until it's clear the market is ignoring the line. The bear trend line, right now we have two. Here and here. And either one could be the more important one. The market could go above this high and reverse down at that line. And that tells me that the market is paying attention to that line. And I would then erase this line. You can look at this and say, wow, Al, that's way too much work. Trading is a lot of work. And if you want to make money, you have to do the work. We have a double bottom and a bear breakout. We have three pushes down. One, two, and three. Whenever the market has three pushes down and reverses up, it's a type of wedge bottom. It does not matter that the second low is above the first low or above the third low. That's irrelevant. The market tried hard three times to get a downside breakout. And now it's reversing up. It does not matter even if it's not a wedge shape. It's still the same forces that create a wedge bottom. So I think of a failed breakout below a double bottom as a type of a wedge bottom. You trade them exactly the same. Should I buy above bar three right here? Well, we have three bear bars and two are fairly strong, decent size closing on their lows. In general, you want to wait for a second entry buy. This is a micro double bottom also. We went down and up and then down and then up. But theoretically, you could buy above here. It is a reasonable buy. You're at the bottom of a trading range and you have a second entry buy signal when you get above this bar. We continued down for a second leg, reasonably strong bear leg. And this became a bear flag. We went up, we went down, we went up, we went down again. And this bear breakout fell far below that pink line. The market's ignoring that pink line. And try to pay attention to it here, but it's clear that it's ignoring it. Now, if anything, it's resistance. We turned down from it. Whenever the market looks like it's ignoring a line, I'm going to ignore it as well. I don't want too many lines on the chart because then it becomes too confusing, too difficult to follow what the market is trying to do. A reversal down. A surprise reversal down. Small double top, one, two. Double top bear flag, or low two bear flag on a smaller timeframe. A pullback from the breakout below these two lows. Big bear bar, probably a second leg down. This could be the extent of the second leg down. In any case, we rallied and we reversed down. I can draw another line. Two ways to draw a wedge bottom. One, two, three. Or one, two, or two, and three. Let's say one, two, and three. There are two ways to draw a wedge bottom here. Whenever there are two ways to draw the same pattern, some computers will use one. Other computers will use the other. We have a bear breakout. Anytime you have a big trend bar, it's a breakout. So we have a big bear breakout. But look at the follow through. We have another bear breakout. And look at this, a bull bar. Another bear breakout. A tail on the bottom, followed by a doji bar and a reversal up. This is weak follow through. Whenever you have a bear trend that has decent bear bars, but bad follow through, that bear trend probably is going to be a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Trading ranges have legs that go down. They have legs that go up. And because of this bad follow through, traders are expecting that there will be a bull breakout above the bear channel, the wedge bottom. Bulls will begin to buy reversals up. Some bulls who bought above this high or that high are still long. They might be using a wide stop, maybe based upon a measured move down from this double bottom. A break up below the double bottom. And they'll use a wide stop. And they'll scale in lower, above a bull bar. Or maybe even above this small doji reversal bar. So some of these bulls are using wide stops, holding long, and looking to scale in lower. Betting that the bad follow through after the bear bars means this is a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Or possibly even a bull trend. So they'll buy more above each new reversal attempt up. Let's say this is the first entry that a trader takes. Let's say he did not take this or this and he buys here. Arguing it's a wedge bottom. Two different ways to draw it. One, two, three. Or one, two, and three. And it's also at the bottom of a parallel created by this original line. Line right here. We're reversing up from it. Markets tend to reverse if you can draw parallel lines like that. This trader at this point is feeling good. Not great follow through. So just like the bears had bad follow through on the way down, the bulls are getting bad follow through on the way up. It looks like a bull leg in a trading range. But it's still a reasonable buy. And if you have a wedge bottom, traders look for two legs sideways to up as a minimum target. One, pull back two. Maybe. Very tight bull channel. More likely. One, pull back, and then two. We had this line that we drew in earlier. And it looks like we might be reversing down from that line. And it is a low two and a broad bear channel. It is a reasonable short. But because this channel up is so tight, and now we have, what is that? Eight bars without a bear bar at this point. That reduces the probability that a reversal down will be successful. It increases the probability that a reversal down will be minor. Leading either to a trading range or a bull flag and then another leg up. What do you do? Well, you're in a bear channel, trying to become a bull trend. But it's not entirely clear, and we're still forming lower highs. I typically would exit part or all below that bear bar, just in case the bear channel is still in effect. And what about the bears? They see that it's a tight bull channel, and that we might get a higher low. Maybe a head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, and right shoulder. However, if they're willing to bet on a continued swing down, maybe there's a 40% chance that this will continue down at this point in a bear channel, forming a new low. Bears know the math is okay. Sell below this bar, maybe put a stop just above this bar, and take a chance that we get our new low. If there's a 40% chance of that, there probably is. Their reward is much greater than two times their risk, and they have a 40% chance of a profitable swing trade. That math is acceptable, so it makes shorting below that bear inside bar a reasonable trade. Too many lines, so worthwhile removing some lines. Now, we have two possible tops. We no longer have a bottom. Yet, we have a major higher low here. A higher low that led to a strong reversal up. And we have another major higher low here. A new low that led to a strong reversal up. It does not have to go to a new high. However, it's a strong reversal up. And at this point, the most logical bare channel line below would be this low and that low right here. New reversals draw new lines. We might get a parallel channel from here. It's worth considering this as a possible bottom of the channel, as well as this. I think it's okay to put both of those there just in case. Well, the bears who shorted below that bear bar, this is a good entry bar. A bear bar closing on its low. It was 40% for the bears shorting below this bar. And with this bar looking like this, if they had taken that short, maybe it's 50% chance now that we'll get down to this low. Bears who sell with reversal down from the top of that channel are short. Do I keep this line? Well, we broke above it and we are reversing down. It's probably better to keep using this point and then maybe move the line up to this point. Or this point and that point. I would use this point and that point as the new top of the channel. Until we get more information. And we sold off with good follow through. And then a new low. A high three. Three pushes up. One above this bar. Two above that bar. And three above that bar. And look where we are. We're at the bottom of the channel. It's reasonable for bears to take partial or full profits on the reversal up. You can argue again that it's a possible wedge. One, two, and three. So, reasonable to get out above this bar. Aggressive bulls will buy on this reversal up. Especially since it's the third reversal up near the bottom of the channel. A high three. I want to point something else out. Let's say you're a bull and you bought as the market fell below this low. You bought here, maybe you made a scalp. And you bought here, you made a scalp. We fell below this low, you bought, you made a scalp. Bulls are buying every new low. They buy this low. Some bulls will buy this low, use a wide stop, and scale in lower, knowing that every prior new low led to a profitable trade if you bought the low. Buying below this low, fell below, you made money. Buying below this low, you made money or made money. Buying at this low, you made money or you made money. Buying at this low, you probably will make money. So bulls are buying new lows. That means it's a stair pattern. The pullbacks from the new lows are going high enough up for bulls to make a profit. So they'll continue to buy new lows until they no longer make a profit. When bulls are able to make money consistently like this, repeatedly like this, in a bear trend, that bear trend probably is soon going to evolve into a trading range. Either buy with a limit order at this low, or better, buy above a bull bar on a reversal up, especially since it's the third attempt to reverse up near this low. Bears should get out of their shorts at this point, or at least out of most of their shorts. Aggressive bulls will buy here. Other bulls will wait two or three bars to see if we start to get a series of bull bars, and then they'll buy. Higher probability, but if they buy up here, their stop is further away. And there's less profit remaining in the trade because they're entering higher up. IOI, we have a bar, an outside bar, and then an inside bar. So this bar is inside this. This bar is inside that. So inside, outside, inside. The type of micro double bottom, a good buy signal bar, a bull bar closing near its high. This is a reasonable buy. Good entry bar for the bulls. Very good follow through bar for the bulls. Big down, big up, big confusion. At a minimum, the market will probably go sideways rather than down. And it might be the start of a bull trend. We have three pushes down. One, two, three. Didn't quite reach that line, but certainly one, two, three. So some computers see this as a wedge bottom, in which case this could be the end of the bear trend. Good buying pressure. Three bull bars closing on their highs. And this bar is a better bull bar than this bar. Bigger body closing on its high. This bar is better than that bar. Bigger bull body closing on its high. So the market is starting to accelerate upward. This might be, in fact, a reversal up from a wedge bottom. At this point, I think the odds slightly favor the bulls. We're always in long. It's more likely that we're going at least a little higher before we go to a new low. Wedge bottom, even though it does not look like a wedge, it's still a wedge bottom. Traders will be looking for two legs sideways to up. Leg one, we don't know. Maybe leg one ends up here. And then a pullback and then a second leg. At this point, had you bought above this bull bar, you would put your stock below this low. In fact, a lot of bulls who buy above that bar and get filled right here, they'll immediately put their stock below this low. A third entry buy, they do not want to see the market fall below. This is a type of nested wedge where the third leg is also a wedge. We have a wedge here. One, two, three. And three subdivides into a micro wedge. High one, high two, high three. Slightly higher probability. Sold off for four bars, three bear bars, yet reversed up right around this high. You had some scale-end bears who sold this high, sold more higher, and they needed a pullback, at least one pip below this high, to get out with a profit on their second entry. And it looks like they did not get it. This bar represents those limit order bears giving up. So you have bears selling in a bear trend and losing money. Does that sound right? A bear selling in a bear trend losing money? Something's wrong with the premise of a bear trend. And it increases the chances that we'll get at least a second leg up to the top of the channel. The bulls, I do not think they get out below any of these bars, so they hold long. And at this point, a strong enough reversal up. We have four bull bars, now five bull bars and six bars. I think bulls will raise their stop from below here to below here. We have a nested low two. We have a low one, pullback low two, low two. So either one of these is a low two. And the second leg up is also a low two. Yet it looks like it's failing. So the bears who are selling below this low, below that low, below this low, it looks like they're trapped. Just like the limit order bears who sold at this high and scaled in higher are trapped. Now you look at this and say, ah, the bears are losing money and the bears are no longer able to make money. And therefore those bears have to buy back their shorts. That increases the chances that this trend will continue higher. We're at the top of a reasonable channel. A good location to take partial profits, either with a limit order here. In fact, that's what created this tail. In part, you had bulls taking partial profits there. Or you could take partial profits on the low two, below this bar, or the low two, below this bar. Low one, low two, low one, or low two, or low two. Reasonable to take partial profits, especially when things are not all that clear. We're always in long, but where are the consecutive big bull trend bars that typically happen if this is the start of a big bull trend? They're not present. So this is probably not yet the start of a strong bull trend. And if it's not the start of a strong bull trend, and you're at some kind of a resistance level, and your reward is at least twice your initial risk, it's reasonable to take some partial profits. Maybe you take some partial profits here. A micro double top, up and down, and then up and down at a resistance level. The top of a channel, and a lower high. Just like here is a reasonably strong leg up, we reverse down. You have to be open to the possibility that another strong leg up, and we reverse down to another new low. At this point, I think it's more likely that we will not reverse down to a new low, and that we'll either stay sideways or continue higher. Okay, we have six bars up here with no bare body, and five of those six bars are bull bars. Three or four of them are closing in their upper half. And the context is good. We have a wedge bottom. The odds are we're going to go at least slightly higher. Is this a strong bull trend? No. Look at all the bars with very prominent tails and small bodies. And bad follow through after this bull breakout. We could not get a strong bull breakout here. We have a decent bull breakout here, but a reversal down here. Bull trend, yes, but it looks more like a bull leg in what will become a trading range. So we have a bare leg in a trading range, the start of a bull leg in a trading range. We have another decent strong bear bar, and you can argue it's a wish. Three pushes up. One, and then two, and then three. So another good location to take profits. Maybe below this bear bar. Partial profits, maybe full profits. As far as shorting that goes, when a channel is as tight as this is, it's probably a minor reversal, which means it probably will not fall very far. More likely it'll fall and form another bull flag for higher prices afterwards. Three pushes up. One, two, three. A weak rally. Lots of dojis and pullbacks. A lot of pullbacks on the way up. Probably a bull leg in a trading range. We broke above this high. Just like bulls were barring every new low on the way down and making money. Bears will start selling every new high and willing to scale in higher, expecting to make money on at least a drop big enough for a scalp. You'll have other bears selling below this bar, arguing it's a wedge in a trading range. I think it's a pretty tight bull channel, and I usually don't take that short, unless we go sideways and form more of a micro double top. It's a reasonable location, though, to take partial or full profits. If this is evolving into a trading range, we're in the upper half and we have a wedge rally, and the rally is weak. So it's a good location to take full or partial profits. In a tight channel like this, bulls are buying that low. They're buying with a limit order at that low. They're buying with a limit order at this low or that low, betting that all of those bear reversal attempts will fail. They know it's not a strong bull trend, but they know it's a bad sell, and therefore the market will continue sideways or up. I'm now going to draw bull channels, and I will use the E-mini market for examples. Look at this chart. We have a five minute E-mini chart, lots of reversals. Every time you see two reversals up, you can draw a line. I can draw a line here, and once it breaks below it and reverses up, I move the line here. Once it breaks below it and then reverses up, I can draw a line here and then here. And the same with lines above. We have a reversal down and a reversal down. I would have a line there. We would replace it once we had the breakout. And here we have a reversal down and a reversal down, another possible top of a channel. So this might be resistance. And then what about this? Reversal down, reversal down. It's possible that this channel may continue all the way up here. Reversal down, reversal down, a possible top of a channel. And we have a reversal down from there as well. Here, one, two, three, four, five. We have five bars up, no bear bars. Do you think this is a major reversal? Or do you think this is simply a pullback from this bull breakout, a pair of consecutive bull trend bars? It's more likely a pullback from a strong bull breakout. This reversal down probably is not going to go very far. I would rather wait for a second signal. So maybe we go up again and then get a double top. That would be a higher probability short than this. Alternatively, if we start to reverse down strongly, then I'll start selling lower. Right now, at this point, more likely buyers at the low of this bar and lower. And that this will form a bull flag and we'll get at least a little bit more up. And that's what we got. A very strong bull breakout. And the bears are giving up. Not only did we break above this three bar bull flag, we broke above this high and above that high. Are computers paying attention to this line right now? No, this line does not help you at this point. You get rid of it. Anytime the market appears to be ignoring a line, get rid of it because it just clutters the chart and it makes it more difficult to see what the market is trying to do. Initially, this line appeared to be unimportant, but we're getting close to it. So the market might see this as a possible top of the channel. Anytime I see any reversal, I'm always drawing lines. And I want to see what the market will do when it gets near those lines. And initially, this line looked much less important than other lines. At this point, those other lines are clearly unimportant. And you have to be wondering, is this the start of a bull channel? Will this be resistance? Will bulls take profits there? Will bears sell there? Will you? Will tills this be resistance? Will theajuHAI?kaar? Will is correct. I doubt em... I can show you whether you are industrious, or not gonna try to put the already face. This line would two, three. Whenever you have a double top and a bull breakout that fails, you have three pushes up. That is a type of wedge. Also, we tried to reverse down here and we accelerated upward here. And this is the best looking bull bar in more than 20 bars. It's the best looking bull bar in 60 or 70 bars. Whenever you see that, you have to be thinking that instead of a measuring gap, this might be an exhaustive end of a trend. It could be a second leg trap. So this could be a wedge, bear flag, first leg, and then a second leg and we reverse down. I'm always thinking about a bear case whenever the market is in a bull trend because 40% of the time the bear case will in fact be correct. Different ways to draw lines, reversal down, reversal down, reversal down. I'm always drawing lines and I want to see what the market does near any of those lines. Will it ignore the line or will it reverse? Whenever I have a channel with fewer bars and there's a channel with more bars, the channel with the fewer bars usually is less important, but sometimes it's important. The bigger patterns are usually more important. The bigger trend is clearly an important bull trend line and I'm always thinking, okay, if the market falls below this line, maybe the bull trend has ended, especially if it falls below this major high or low. A strong breakout to a new high, this is clearly a major higher low. Because it's major and I can draw a line, I'm always going to draw a parallel and connect it to the highest point in between to create a parallel to see if in fact this is the bottom of the channel and that parallel is the top of the channel. There's the parallel line. Possibly this could be the top of the channel. We don't know what was to the left, but let's say this was the top of a rally. Then this is also a possible top of a bull channel. We have a micro double top, up and then pause, and then up again, and then pause. This might be the end of this move up. As I said, it could be a second leg trap. First leg is this wedge, and then very strong breakout and second leg. We're failing above the high of the channel, the top of this blue channel line, and we're failing within five bars. We continue to up three bars and are reversing down. It's a plausible top, not a strong short, but a possible top. You can call it a parabolic wedge, one, two, three, where the third push goes above the top of the line, so it's a parabolic channel. We have a couple things now in favor of the bears. Could be a failed breakout above the top of this training range. Two ways to draw the parabolic wedge, either with the green line or the purple line. I'm always looking for other resistance. A very common type of resistance is a measured move target. We had a strong leg up here, and then a pullback, and then a strong breakout. We are just about almost at a perfect measured move up, based upon the height of this original leg. So that is also resistance that some computers will use, either to take profits on their longs, or to go short. And that's what caused this slight reversal down. Bulls might take profits exactly at the line, or a tick or two below, or on the reversal down. A micro double top, and many different ways to draw wedges, and a failed breakout above the top of a bull channel, and a failed breakout above the top of a trading range. Low probability short at this point, but reasonable short. So some bears will sell below the low of this bar, or maybe even below the low of this bear bar, closing near its low, putting a stop up here. Knowing that at this point, they might have a 30% chance of a profitable trade, but it could be the top of the move, and we can come all the way back down to the bottom of this buy climax, possibly all the way down to the bottom of the trading range. That means that even though their probability is small, their reward is so much bigger than the risk, it's reasonable to take that short. I usually do not take that short. I wait until I see more strength on the part of the bears. But some bears will take that short. It has a positive trader's equation, but a low probability. I like to win most of the time, so I usually do not take low probability trades, even though the math is okay to take a trade like that. I'm going to take a trade like that. And look what we got. We have about eight bars down here, probably a big enough reversal so that we'll get a second leg down after any bounce. I'm typically selling either at the high of this bar, or maybe the second or third consecutive bear close, expecting that we'll get at least a lower high and a second leg down. But it is okay to take that short as well. Where are the targets on the downside? Well, the top of this trading range, you can call it a triangle, three pushes down, one, two, three, even though this is slightly below that, you can call it a trading range. And we're testing the top of that trading range. That is support. It was resistance. We sold off at this price repeatedly. We broke strongly above it, and now we're pulling back to it. There will always be some buyers here, bears taking profits and bulls buying. Other targets on the downside are the bottom of this buy climax. Or the bottom of this bull leg, or even the bottom of the bull leg here. At this point, I think it looks bullish. Two legs down, one pullback, two. And the pullback looks much weaker than the rally. And we're forming a higher low. And a breakout test, a pullback to the top of this trading range. High two bull flag, two legs down, one pullback, two. You can call it an ABC pullback. A, B, C. Testing the top of the trading range. Tests are rarely perfect. I think of it as a zone. And I'm not surprised if it falls a little bit below those highs. It did not fall strongly below. And we're forming a micro double bottom. We went down, we went up, we went down a little bit. So reasonable to buy. Maybe above the high of that bull bar. Possibly for a test of this lower high, or a test of that high. In any case, these bears will almost certainly take profits above the high of this bull bar. Because of all the things that I said. A two-legged pullback, testing, the support at the top of the trading range. And after a very strong reversal up. This is a lot of work. You're constantly drawing lines. You're constantly taking trades. A lot of the trades don't work. You're getting out. No one's going to pay you just for sitting in front of your computer. If you want to make money, you have to do the work, which means you have to be thinking constantly. And you have to be constantly changing your opinion. I use the Forex market to give examples of how to draw lines in bear channels. And then I use the E-mini market on how to draw lines in bull channels. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of six videos on channels. Thank you for watching. Thank you.