 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This series of videos is on the basics of Forex trading. I'm first going to talk about what exactly is the Forex market. I will then talk about the Forex sessions, different times around the world. And finally, I'll talk about leverage and fundamentals. Forex, the term itself is a contraction for foreign exchange. And currencies trade against one another in pairs. For example, if you go to Paris on a vacation, you go to a foreign exchange shop, you give them dollars, they give you Euros. Now, I mentioned the term Forex means foreign exchange. But the reality is, there's no exchange. There's no New York Stock Exchange or NASDAQ. The market is an off exchange market. It's not regulated by anybody. You simply go into any little shop around the world, and there are thousands and thousands of them. And you give them dollars, they give you Euro. You give them Euros, they give you Yen. Whatever you want. They will make the exchange for you. And they do not report to any centralized market. And they are not regulated. No one sees your trade. No one knows what anyone else's trade is. And because of that, there's no last trade. If you trade Apple on the NASDAQ, everyone agrees on the last trade. The NASDAQ reports it. But in the Forex market, there are hundreds of trades taking place at any one time in hundreds of locations all over the world. And which one is the last trade? Nobody knows. It's yours. People mean saying. but they have no idea of the volume taking place at 100 other banks. So the volume that you see, for example, some brokerage houses provide volume on their charts from their bank. It's not reliable because it doesn't give you any idea of what all the other banks are doing. And your broker, even if it's a big broker, might be trading 1% of the total volume that's taking place. Forex market, thousands of places all over the world that do it. Here's one square mile in Manhattan, and every one of these little red dots, big dots, they're all foreign exchange centers. And none of them reports to any central agency. Every bank, every broker, every little exchange office like this, they create their own market. They'll buy if you want to sell. They'll sell if you want to buy. And it's also the biggest trading market in the world. You know, bigger than the stock market, bigger than the bond markets. So who trades foreign exchange markets? Well, you often hear about huge speculators like George Soros making billions of dollars betting against the British pound. There are speculators, major hedge funds, large individual traders. There are also international businesses. If you're Apple, you're buying equipment from China. You have to pay them. You're not going to pay them with dollars. And if China is making goods in China, and they're selling the goods in the United States, they have to transfer Yuan into dollars. And that's true of anything. If you go to Paris and you want to buy a salad, you have to give them Euros. You cannot give them dollars. So you have to go to some exchange place to trade your dollars into Euros. And when you come back home, you go to another foreign exchange place, you give them Euros, they give you dollars. You can do it at the airport. And the airport knows that you're somewhat desperate to make the trade. And as a result, the spread between what you want to give them and what they want from you is huge. Plus, they often have fees. So the cost of a transaction at an airport might be 10%. So if you give them $100 and you convert it into Euros, and then you immediately sell the Euros back to them, you'll get maybe $90. Even though the market has not changed, they will keep 10% of the transaction. Tourists might transact hundreds of dollars at a time, but that's not true of governments, businesses, and speculators. They exchange millions to billions of dollars at a time, and they don't want to be paying a 10% transaction fee. They need a very tiny transaction costs. And the foreign exchange markets allow that. In general, the transaction fees, whatever, if there's a brokerage fee, the spread, it's usually less than 1%. And if you're an institution, I'm sure you're paying far less than 1% on every transaction. Now, why would anyone want to trade the Forex markets? Well, there are several good reasons for beginners. First of all, the account size is small. You compare that to the size required to trade stocks, options, or futures. The Forex market brokers often allow you to open very small accounts. For example, here's one that allows you to open an account with $30. You can start with much less capital. Also, there's a tremendous profit potential. You said that George Soros made billions of dollars in the currency markets. Well, here's a story about Paul Rotter. And when he was a young man, he was supposedly making $60 million a year for many years. He was trading German bonds, but he was also trading Forex markets. The potential for profit is huge. Also, he started out as an individual trader, just like you, just like me. Okay. If you are going to be trading Forex markets, you pretty much have to pick what time of day that you're going to trade. You don't want to be trading in the afternoon one day, in the middle of the night another day. The Forex markets are open pretty much 24 hours a day. They're open on Sundays at 2 o'clock in the afternoon Pacific time, California time where I live. And they close Friday at 2 o'clock California time. And then throughout the week, there are different sessions. Australia trades at certain hours and in Tokyo and in London, New York. And then it starts over again 24 hours later, again in Sydney. Although the Forex markets are open 24 hours a day, most traders pick one session to trade. For example, California time where I am, the Asia session starts about 3 o'clock in the afternoon. It goes until midnight. The European session overlaps it a little bit. Sometimes it gets active around 11 o'clock at night, sometimes midnight. And it stays active until 7 o'clock in the morning. And the American session becomes active around 5 or 6 o'clock in the morning. And then it gets very quiet around 11 o'clock or noon. And the session's overlap. You can see there's an overlap here between London and New York. And an overlap here between Sydney and Tokyo. Here is a chart of the Euro versus the Yen, a five-minute chart. And this is the European session. And it stayed active until 5.30, 6.30 or so. And the U.S. session began to get active at that time as well. Most traders pick one of the three sessions to trade. So, for example, here's the U.S. session. The bars are big. The market's moving. And then when it closes, this is what often happens. The market enters a very tight trading range. There's still trading taking place, but very difficult to make money. So, most traders should not trade between the U.S. session and the Asian session. The Asian session often overlaps the European session. But a lot of times it also goes quiet in a tight trading range. Again, not worth trading. Great liquidity when the market is active like this. Much less liquidity in between sessions. In any case, if you're trading the U.S. session, the Asian session, the European session, you're never going to get too big. And slippage is not really going to be a problem. There's so much money being traded that no matter how big you get, you're not going to be too big. You're not going to affect the prices. The U.S. session almost always ends with a very tight range. The Asia session often ends with a tight range. It often overlaps the European session. Now, one of the advantages of trading Forex markets is leverage. As an individual trader, when you trade, you have to open an account with a broker. You're not going to go to a local foreign exchange shop and trade because you cannot make money because the transaction costs are 10%. You need transaction costs in the neighborhood of 1%. And to get that, you have to open an account with a broker. And every broker has a minimum margin requirement. It varies depending on which pair of currencies you're trading. And sometimes the margin requirement allows you to have 50 times leverage. And that means, for example, you may only need 2% or 3% to place a trade. If you want to place a $50,000 trade, you may only have to have $1,000 or $2,000 in cash to take the trade. Margins change. When a particular currency pair is having big ranges, the broker will increase the margin requirement. So instead of 50 times your account value, you may at times only be able to trade 20 times your account value. One of the advantages of Forex trading is the leverage. And a lot of brokers will often allow you to trade with 50 to 1 leverage. You only have to have $1 to control $50 worth of trading. So, for example, if you want to trade $100,000 worth of dollar versus the yen, you can do it with an account size as small as $2,000. Now, if your account size is only $2,000, you don't want to be trading $100,000 worth of dollar again, because it would not take many losing trades before you lose your entire account. However, you can trade with a lot of leverage. So if you have a $2,000 account, you can certainly trade with a 5 or 10 to 1 leverage. As an individual trader, I don't care at all about fundamental information. However, institutions pay a lot of attention to it. They read the Wall Street Journal, the Financial Times, they watch CNBC, they pay attention to international news, they pay attention to economic indicators, they pay attention to interest rate changes and differentials. And that's all nonsense as an individual trader. As an individual trader, that stuff is useless. As an individual trader, this is all I'm interested in. If the market's going up, I want to buy. And I don't care why it's going up. I don't care if there's some expert on television explaining what's going on. I don't care if there's an article in the Wall Street Journal. All I care is the market's going up. The only way I can make money is buying. So I'm going to buy. Okay. As a Forex trader, an individual trader, you're far better off just to look at charts and use price action to decide how to take trades, how to enter and how to manage your trades and totally ignore fundamentals. When I look at this chart, I know the fundamentals. Let's say this is the chart of the U.S. dollar. When I look at this chart, the fundamentals are good for the dollar. I don't need to watch television to tell me that the fundamentals support the dollar and that the dollar should go higher. I just look at the chart and that's all I need. Whatever people are saying on television, whatever the Wall Street Journal is saying, totally useless to me as a trader. There are risks of Forex trading as well. The advantage of Forex trading, leverage, tight bid-ask spread. Those are good things, but they also can be risks. Leverage. Sometimes traders will take positions that are too big and just a few losses and they can wipe out their account. Also, some brokerage firms charge bid-ask spreads that are outrageous, especially on small accounts. And if the transaction cost is 3%, 4%, or 5%, it becomes virtually impossible to make money. And then there are other risks as well. International interest rates, international news. And then firms also make mistakes. I remember talking with many brokerage firms over the years. Not so much now, but 10, 15, 20 years ago, 30 years ago. Stuff would happen and it would be the firm making a mistake. But when you set up your account with that firm, if you read the small print, it says they are not liable for mistakes. You are. So if they screw up, they don't pay. You pay. It's also a possibility in settlement. Not so much if you're trading a Forex account with a broker. But if you're an institution, one side might not deliver. You give them a whole bunch of dollars and they're supposed to give you yen and they don't give you the yen. There's nothing you can do about it. But that's not a problem for individual traders. For a broker, pick some big reputable firm. Less chance of problems. The commissions are low or non-existent. The spread between the bid and the ask is small. And they usually have a pretty good trading platform. Also, they usually allow you to have positions in multiple pairs at one time. Back in 2015, there were a couple of readers choice awards winners. Interactive brokers. FXCM. But there was a rule that changed a few years ago. And it restricted leverage on firms that offer trading in other products beyond Forex markets. For example, TradeStation no longer allows Forex trading because the margin requirements apparently went way, way up. They could not use the traditional Forex margin requirements that purely Forex firms were doing. So TradeStation stopped offering Forex trading. And Interactive brokers had a similar situation. Now they have a cap on the biggest position size you can take as an individual trader. I don't know if it's 30,000 units. But anyway, it's small. And it's so small that individual traders no longer trade Forex with Interactive brokers. They still have institutional accounts. But you need, I think, a million dollar Forex account, million dollars, U.S. dollars in the account to trade it. So they're pretty much out of the Forex trading business. Yet firms that only trade Forex do not have that same restriction. So FXCM, for example, is a good choice. There are other good choices as well. Popular trading platforms. MetaTrader is popular. And so is NinjaTrader. In this video, I talked briefly about what the Forex market is. I then talked about the sessions and how they overlap. It's basically a 24-hour market. And finally, I talked about leverage and how fundamentals are not at all helpful to an individual trader. Just look at the charts. The charts tell you all that you need to know. This is Al Brooks, and thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of several videos on the basics of Forex training.