 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is another in the series of videos on chart basics and price action. In this video, I'm going to be talking more about what exactly price action is, and then I'm going to move on to discussing the pain trade. Price action is any representation of price movement on any financial instrument, on any type of chart, on any timeframe. And 50 years ago, reading tape coming off a ticker machine was a type of price action analysis. Price is changing with every tick, every trade during the day, and every price change is an example of price action. So for example, here's the tick chart where every little bar is one trade. We went up here. We went sideways. We went up. We went down. We went up sideways here for a few trades at the same price. And then we went up sideways at the same price. And then we went up. This tick chart shows every trade that takes place during the day. Everything is important. Never dismiss anything as noise or unimportant. Some things that initially look like they're not very important often lead to great trades. I think that traders who talk about noise really do not understand the markets. They're either lazy or they're simply ignorant. There is no noise. Everything that happens, happens for a reason. Noise implies that the movements are random. Nothing is random. All the trades are being conducted by computers with algorithms. And the algorithms are logical. Just because you do not understand the logic does not mean that it's random price action. It's not. Everything is for a reason. So whenever I hear somebody talk about noise, I simply think that they just don't understand. They don't understand what's going on. Look at this chart. We have four consecutive bull bars closing above their midpoints. Traders start buying closes. At some point, traders call this a buy the close bull trend. They wait for the bar to the close and then they just buy. They buy the market or they place a limit order to buy the close. If you're a buy the close bull and you bought right here and you see this, what's your feeling? Are you thinking, oh boy, we're going higher or you say, gosh, that's disappointing. Right? So you have disappointed bulls who bought this close. Now, if you're one of those bulls, what are you going to do? You're going to place an order to get out break even. So you buy here. You're disappointed here. You place a limit order at that price to get out break even. And what happens if enough traders do that? Then the bulls are selling and the market goes down. The bears are always selling. The bears know that. When they create this bar, they've trapped these buy the close bulls. And these bulls are probably going to try to get out break even when the market gets back to that close. These bears will sell more with a limit order at that close or a tick below that close, knowing that the bulls are going to sell there as well. So you get a give up situation. Somebody might look at this and say, oh, this is just noise. It's not noise. It's happening for a reason. And that's true with every bar on the chart. Bulls giving up. So traders start to sell. They're expecting the bulls to give up here. So they sell closes. They sell above bars. Here's a bull reversal. They see three big bear bars closing below their midpoints. They believe the bull reversal is going to fail and become a bear flag. So they sell the bull close. We have a bear close here after the bull close. They sell the bear close. They sell below the bear bar. None of this is noise. It's all happening for a reason. Every bar is happening for a reason. Every now and then someone asks me if the markets are different now from 30 years ago. And my thought about this is that all price action is genetically based. It's a reflection of rational human behavior. And that is due to our genes. And because that's the case, markets behave today the way they did 100 years ago, 1,000 years ago. And they will continue to behave the same way until we evolve into some kind of new species. For example, look at this chart. It goes back to the 1920s. Here's the 1929 crash. If I did not have these dates on here, you would look at that chart and say, oh, yeah, it could be anything. It could be the euro versus the dollar. It could be the stock market. It could be apple. It could be crude oil. It looks like charts that we look at every day. But yet it's not. It's from 80 years ago. Stock market crash, big sell off. And when it bounced 50%, traders sold. 50% pullback. It sold off into a wedge bottom, spike in channel wedge bottom. And then it rallied to around 50% of that bear leg. And it tested this lower high. So now we have a breakout test of this low and a double top bear flag with this high. And we sold off again. World War II. We have two legs down. One pullback two. And a higher low major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout. And then a double bottom higher low. Traders buy. We've got a pretty strong reversal up here. A pause. Traders expect a measured move up. And we get that. And that's also about a 50% retracement of that entire rally. We're looking at charts from decades ago. Yet they're behaving the same as charts today. And that's because the market behavior is based upon human behavior and rational behavior. Traders behave rationally just as they did back then. And if you have enough traders participating, all behaving rationally and in their best interest, this is the outcome. A chart that makes sense. And it looks the same today as it did back then. Doesn't matter if it's the Great Depression, World War II. Long before there were computer algorithms and high frequency trading, charts looked the same. All markets and all timeframes have the same price action. Here are three different charts. They all look very similar. One is a five minute chart. One's a daily chart. And one is a one minute chart. Yet they all look the same. Price action is the same on all timeframes. Now, which of these charts is General Electric, the stock, E-mini, and which is the Euro versus the dollar Forex market? Which is the daily chart? Which is the one minute chart? Which is the five minute chart? It's impossible to know because price action is the same for all markets. Doesn't matter if it's GE or Forex market. And the same for all timeframes. It doesn't matter if it's a one minute chart or a daily chart. And here's the answer in case you're curious. Sometimes you'll hear traders on television talk about the pain trade. Beginners hate the pain trade. The pain trade is simply a low probability event. When traders see a bull swing like this, a series of bull bars, six consecutive bull bars, they assume this is a bull flag and that we're going to continue higher. The probability is that we're either going to go sideways or more up. The probability is that we're not going to go down, at least not anytime soon. So if something is obviously unlikely, like a Bay reversal, it is more likely than what it appears to be. That's my general rule. When something is extremely obvious, like this is extremely obvious, we're going up, then it's probably not as likely as it appears to be. Whenever something is very unlikely, traders assume it's not going to happen and they're positioned to the opposite. Here, a bear reversal is unlikely. So traders are buying pullbacks, they're buying breakouts, and bears are not willing to sell. But then something happens like this. And beginners are shocked. We had a bull breakout. And for an instant, this was a big bull trend bar. And then by the time it closed, it closed below its middle. It closed below the low of the past seven or eight bars. Despite the tail, it's a big bear reversal closing below the low of seven or eight bars. The odds are we're going down. Bulls were heavily committed to their longs, thinking that the market had to go higher, thinking that the chance of, a bear breakout was small. Now, all the bulls who bought anywhere in here, when this bar closes, they're all holding losing positions. They have to get up. The bulls have to sell. And the bears who wanted to sell higher and did not sell up here, now are thinking, gosh, I got to sell lower. This is going down. Because a lot of traders are trapped into longs, thinking the market should go up, they're often in denial when they see this bar. They see this big tail and say, well, maybe that's the end of the selling. Maybe we'll bounce back up. And if I bought over here, I'll get out break even on the bounce. It happens quickly. And traders don't adjust mentally fast enough. So they get trapped into a bad trade, coming up with reasons why the market will probably bounce and let them out without a loss. And they end up missing a good short. Professional traders, they get trapped into trades all the time. But they don't get upset. A professional trader sometimes will buy high. And they're not upset by the reversal down if they believe the market's in a trading range. They'll simply buy more, trusting that it'll come back to their original price. And they'll make money on their lower entry and get out break even on their first entry. So they scale in. They know that 20% of the time a breakout will succeed and they'll lose. But because they know that 80% of breakouts fail, they can bet that breakouts will fail. They can buy high and then add on if it goes low, betting that the bear breakout will fail. They can sell high, betting that if it goes higher, it'll eventually turn down. So they'll sell more higher, betting that it's going to reverse. Because they know that 80% of breakouts fail. Rally, reverse down. New low, reverse up. New high, reverse down. New low, reverse up. Eventually, the market will have a successful breakout. And they'll lose money or they might lose money. If they're fast in understanding the price action, usually the breakout will give a clue before the breakout actually takes place. And then the fader will not take the fade on that final entry. Every pain trade is a breakout. This is a pain trade. A big breakout happens very fast. And beginners just get shocked. They are buying a series of bull bars. They see a bull flag, two little pushes down, one, two, they buy. They see a big bull close, a bull breakout, they buy. And then as this is forming, they're shocked. They can't believe it's happening. They keep hoping that it's going to stop here. It's going to stop here. It's going to stop here. They keep relying on hope instead of objectivity, looking at this saying, we're going down. I got to get out. And a lot of times, beginners will think it's a conspiracy. It's not fair. The institutions are conspiring with one another to steal my money. You don't have enough money for the institutions to care. All of us individual traders put together do not have enough money for the institutions to care. We are 5% of the market. The institutions are 95% of the market. The institutions are 95% of the market. That 95% cannot make enough profit off the 5%. So they don't care about us. Professional traders, they love these breakouts. Beginners get trapped and complain that life is not fair. Professional traders understand what's going on. And they see this and say, oh, it's going down. I'm going to sell. When it's doing this, there's a very high probability that it's going to go lower. So they don't get emotional. They just sell for any reason. They sell as the bar is forming. They sell this close. They sell above this bar, betting the bull reversal will fail. They'll sell below this bar, below this bar, betting that we're going lower. They're just very quick to make the decisions. They don't get emotional. They know the market's going down. So they just sell. We've got a lot of small bars, sideways bars. We go down, we go up, we go down, we go up. We're in a trading range. Traders know that 80% of breakouts will fail. And that it's better to sell high above bars, sell above this bar, sell above these bars, and buy low, buy below that bar, buy below this bar, buy below that bar, betting that when the bars look like this and we're sideways, it's a trading range and most breakouts will fail. If it tries to break out to the upside, it's going to fail. So look to sell. If it tries to break out the downside, you have to assume it's going to fail as well. But professional traders are also aware that sometimes you get an unexpected big breakout. Sometimes news happens. Sometimes fundamentals suddenly change and the market can change dramatically. Like here. Here with this bar, a big bull bar closing above its midpoint, closing above the high of the past 20 bars, traders decide that the price is wrong. And it's quickly moving up to a more appropriate price. Beginners get paralyzed because they're hypnotized into believing that this is going to continue forever. Experts immediately react, ah, the market's different. The market believes this price is wrong. It's going higher. So experts buy. Here's a trading range. We have a bull breakout above the top of the range. And then we have a follow through bar with the bull body. Traders believe the breakout has been confirmed and that the price is going higher. And that it probably will not reverse back into the range. A bear breakout. We have a bull channel and then a bear breakout. Not a particularly big bear breakout, but after you get three or four bear bars closing on their lows, the odds are we're going lower. And there's not going to be a reversal back up here to allow these bulls to get out without a loss. And then here we're accelerating to the downside and we're probably not going to reverse back up into this attempt at a trading range. Now, how can a market break out if there's no news yet? Let's say there's no news here and the market starts to break out. Let's say here we're in a bull channel and we're starting to break out to the downside and there's no news. Markets often break out before news comes because buyers and sellers begin to sense that something is wrong, that the price is wrong. Maybe the price is too high. Maybe I should start selling some. Maybe the price is too low. Maybe we're going up. Or maybe the trading range top needs to be higher to attract sellers. Maybe the trading range low is not low enough to attract buyers. Price leads fundamentals. So a lot of times before the news comes out, the market will start to move. I remember years ago when Ronald Reagan ordered the bombing of Gaddafi's compound in Libya. I was running radio ads for eye surgery because I owned an eye surgery center back in the 1980s. And I noticed that crude oil was starting to go up, but there was no news. And then all of a sudden we hear about the bombing of Libya and crude oil soared on the bombing. Everyone started listening to the radio and all of a sudden my radio commercial buy resulted in a huge increase to the number of patients. I made a lot of money off Reagan bombing Gaddafi. I don't know how much I made, but probably $20,000 or $30,000 from that. The point of the story, besides the entertaining aspect of it, is that crude oil started to go up before Reagan bombed. Yet, supposedly, nobody knew in advance that he was going to bomb Libya. Here we have a fairly tight trading range. Bulls do not want to buy high. Bears do not want to sell low. So if it's low, it has to go up. If it's high, it has to go down. But sometimes what happens is bulls start buying at the top of the range. And they buy more as it's going up. And eventually at some point here and here, the bears start giving up. The bears start to sense that maybe the top of the range is not going to hold. Maybe this price is too low. And we have to reprice the market pretty quickly to find a more appropriate price. So bears stop selling at the top of the range and wait to sell much higher. And bulls, instead of selling at the top of the range, they buy. And when they start seeing this, they buy aggressively knowing that price is too low. Bears are not selling. We're probably going higher. I'm always looking for a change in behavior. The market is behaving like a trading range here. And then here, I'm starting to pay attention. A bull bar closing on its high. A gap close of this bar above the high of that bar. And then a bigger bull bar closing on its high, opening on its low. So this urgency and it closed above the high of the past 10 bars or so. And this bar is bigger than that bar. If you're quick to notice these things and you were selling highs, you stop doing that here. And you start thinking about, well, maybe I should just buy the clothes. Bears are not selling. So we're probably going up. A lot of times, 15 minutes later, there'll be a news report. And you'll look at the news and say, oh, that's why it went up. A lot of times, the reason for the breakout is not clear at the time the breakout happens. And the news happens immediately after the breakout. Did the news cause the breakout? Was there some kind of insider trading? I don't think that's the case. But a lot of times the market will start to go up minutes before a news report is released because traders sense that the market is going to go up or down. Now the paying trade is a breakout. And it's a breakout of any support or resistance like a trading range or a trend line. Or a bull or bear breakout of a bear flag. Or a bull or bear breakout of a bull flag. Bear channel, so it's a bull flag. Probability is we're going to get a bull breakout. It's also a wedge bottom. One, two, three. Or one, two, three. A wedge bottom. Two legs sideways to up is likely. But what would be the paying trade? We have a wedge bottom. Traders assume bear channel bull flag. We're going up. So if it's more likely we go up, the paying trade is if we go down instead. Anytime something is obvious like, oh, we're obviously going up. Always think that maybe the opposite will happen. Since a bear breakout is unlikely, traders are expecting either a trading range or a bounce. If they get the bear breakout, then the bulls who are buying expecting the bounce up to these lower highs are trapped in and they have to exit quickly. And the bears are trapped out. The bears want to sell up here at these lower highs. They're not expecting it to go down. They see the wedge. They expect two legs up. So both bulls and bears are expecting the market to go up. But instead we get this. A bear bar closing on its low. Second, third bear bar closing on its low. A gap between this high and that low. We're getting a bear breakout below a wedge bottom. That should not be happening. A low probability event. So it's a pain trade and it probably will last more bars than what traders believe will happen. On every chart, any timeframe, 90% of the bars are within trading ranges like here and here. Only 10% of the bars on any chart are in a breakout like this. During the breakout, traders believe the price is too high. And the market has to get down to some new level. Nobody knows exactly where it will be. But price is moving quickly to find a new range of fair prices. These breakouts only occur during about 10% of the bars on any chart. Markets are always constantly transitioning from trading ranges into breakouts. Or breakouts into trading ranges. In this video, I talked more about what price action is. And I also talked about the pain trade. The pain trade is any breakout that appeared unlikely at the time that it occurred. And it traps bulls and bears in. If you have a pain trade that goes up, you have bulls who are trapped out and they have to buy. And they end up buying higher. You have bears who are trapped in to a bad short and they have to buy to get out of their shorts. And the opposite is true if there's a bear breakout. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is one of the series of videos on chart basics and price actions. Res morteators. Now with squ chase shopping sessions. P3 or plus SH What guys might forget is the movement. For more than 10 episodes,