 This is Al Brooks and this is the second of five videos on trends in the Brooks trading course. An important point when you're looking at any chart is that if it's not particularly clear, the chart is in a trading range. Next, I want to talk about how trends can be in a breakout phase or a channel phase and the breakout phase is the strongest point. And finally, I'll talk about the 80% rule. Markets have inertia. Just as trading ranges tend to resist breaking out, 80% of breakout attempts fail within a trading range. When the market's in a trend, it's constantly trying to reverse, but 80% of the reversal attempts will fail. Look at this chart. We're strongly bearish. We're strongly bearish again and again. And then we're strongly bullish and again and again. So is the market in a trend? Well, if it's not clearly in a trend, you have to assume it's in a trading range. It's making strong bull breakout attempts, strong bear breakout attempts. So there are good arguments for the bulls and for the bears. That's one of the hallmarks of a trading range. Whenever the market is not clear and both the bulls and the bears have reasonable arguments, the market is in a trading range and you have to trade it like a trading range. I said that every trading range has both bull and bear arguments. Well, every trading range also contains the start of both bull and bear trends. For example, look at this. We're getting lower highs. And if this chart continued down, you would say that the bear trend began here. Likewise, here we've got a double bottom. And let's say we break above the neckline and go up for a measured move and start a bull trend. And you look back at this chart and ask yourself, where did that bull trend begin? You would say here. However, at this point right here, we're still in a trading range. So it has an early bull trend and it has an early bear trend. In this particular case, we have lower highs and we also have higher lows. Just as every trading range contains trends, trends contain trading ranges. Every pullback and pause is a small trading range. And you can tell that by looking at a smaller timeframe chart. Here, there's no actual pullback. But it's still a positive trend. Here is an actual pullback. And a pullback is a small trading range. So this is a small trading range. This pullback is a small trading range. It extended on and formed a 10 or a 15 bar trading range. Yet we're still in a bull trend. Once a trading range goes on for 20 bars or so, the probability of a reversal becomes almost as high as the probability that the trend will resume. I always look to the left. And whatever to the left is, that's what is always going to be slightly more likely the market will do at some point. So when I'm trading in here, when I'm looking at the market here, it's confusing. Are the bulls or bears in control? Well, the most recent clearly always in setup was here. The market was clearly always in long. So all through here, the probability is slightly higher that we'll get trend resumption up instead of trend reversal down. But every bar that gets added to the trading range reduces the probability for the bulls. And at some point after 20, 30, 40 bars, the probability of trend resumption up falls to 50%. And the probability of trend reversal down rises to 50%. I talk about always in trading. And if the market is clearly always in short, it's far easier to make money selling. So it's better only to look to sell. We're trying to reverse up repeatedly, but the channel is very tight. I don't have the lines drawn, but it's a very tight bear channel. So all of these reversal attempts are minor, which means they'll lead either to a bear flag or a trading range. So traders look to sell every reversal down from a pullback. This bar pulled back above that high. So it's a pullback below one short. Here we pulled back for a few bars and it's a short here. You can also call it a double top lower high. And here we pull back for a few bars. So it's far easier to make money selling when the market is clearly always in short. Also, it's easier to make money if you swing trade. If you sell for any reason here or here, it's better not to take quick profits. If you're a very skilled trader and you can buy back your shorts and then sell again, buy back your shorts and sell again, you'll do fine. But very few traders can do that. And when a channel down is this tight, it's far better to take any short and just hold until there's a clear end to the trend. For any trade, whether you're in a trend or in a trading range, you should always have protective stocks. And they can't be simply in your head. They have to be in the market. Let's say you buy above this bar. You might immediately place a stop here. It's a 50% pullback, a very strong reversal up, high two buy. Most bulls will not let it fall below this bar. And if it does, they'll question whether it's still in a bull trend. So the bull immediately places the stop there. The bears will look at this and say, oh, we were trending up. And then we got a bull breakout above this tight bull channel. So we're trying to get a bull breakout above the tight bull channel. It's an exhaustion bar. Every big bull trend bar is an exhaustion bar. And the gap closed. The gap between this close and that high. We closed it over here. So maybe the bull trend has ended and maybe we're in a trading range. Maybe we're in fact in a bear trend. The bears will look at this as a lower high, not enough bars for a major reversal, but certainly enough bars for a minor reversal, a swing down. And the bears will look at this as a double top lower high. In any case, the bulls who buy here cannot have a protective stop in their heads. They have to have the stop in the market just below the low of this bar, because sometimes you get this. It happens often enough. And if you don't have that stop there taking you out, you'll keep coming up with reasons why you should continue to hold on to your long position, hoping that it will reverse up. And you cannot do that. A breakout is the strongest type of trend. It can be one bar. It can be many bars. The bars are really scary for beginners. They look at this and the market's not doing much of anything at all. So it's pretty peaceful watching it. And then you suddenly have to change your way of thinking when you see a big bar like this, far bigger than all the prior bars, 10 times bigger, posing far above the high of all the other bars. So we're no longer in a tight trading range. We're now in a trend, very strong bull breakout, high probability that we're going higher. But here you could use very small stops. The bars are small, the market sideways. Here, you now have to use a wide stop. Below that bar, below this bar, probably below all of the bars. It's very easy to miss the trade. You're denying that it's the start of a trend. Well, chances are it is the start of a trend. Chances are. That means high probability that it's going to continue higher. High probability of a profit if you buy. Yet, stop far below. So risk is great. And that's always the case. Whenever you see something that has a high probability of predicting something else, like higher prices, your risk reward is going to be bad. Usually, your risk is big because the stop is far away due to how fast the market moved up. You have to get long. Even if it's a small position, you have to get long. And what I talk about in this course constantly is ways to get long. You have to train yourself to react reflexively. You see this, you know the market's no longer in a tight trading range. The market has changed. You need to get long. And you can simply buy closes. You can buy the close of the breakout bar. If you want higher probability, you wait to see if the next bar has a bull close. And then you buy that bull close. And how do you buy it? You just hit the button, buy the market. Or you could place a limit order as soon as this bar closes to buy at the close of that bar. But the easiest thing is, when you see that second bar having a bull close, you just hit buy the market. Again, stop is far away. So you're risking a lot more money. You have to trade smaller. You can put your stop below the breakout bar. If this is going to be a successful breakout, it should not trade below such an exceptional bar. You could also put it below the entire bull leg. Both are reasonable. And the odds are, whenever you see a breakout that is as big as this, it's going to result in some kind of a measured move up. Maybe simply based upon the open of the bar to the close of the bar, measured move up here. But it certainly has at least a 60% chance of resulting in higher prices and some kind of a measured move up. So, I think one of the hardest things for a beginner is, all they think about is risk. I can't lose money. I worked so hard to get this account so that I can trade. And if I lose my money, I lose my trading career. I die. My trading career has died. So, all they focus on is risk. And because of that, they're always looking for the tightest possible stock. And they're also always waiting for pullbacks because they think, well, I don't want to buy up here because my stock is too big. I can't afford to risk that much. While they wait, the trend can continue up a long way. They have to get used to just buying at the market. They see the market's going up. Tight channel. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe. You just buy at the market, put a stop down here, go for a walk for 15 minutes. And if that's what you have to do to stay in the trend, because this tight bull channel is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. That means the odds are we're going higher. That beginner, now, his stop is all the way down here. So, his risk is even greater. So, he's even more afraid and he's going to keep waiting for a pullback instead of looking at the chart and saying, wow, this is going up and it may keep going up. I should just get long. Now, the beginner is hoping for that pullback and misses a whole rally. If you are a bull and you're long for any reason, let's say you bought somewhere down here, your stop is down here. And that stop is probably much bigger than what you typically use. And that means your risk is greater than normal. So, what do you have to do? Well, if you're a computer algorithm, you have to do something to make sure that your risk does not get too big. The easiest thing to do is to reduce your position size. So, even in a strong bull trend, bulls have to take profits at some point to reduce their risk. And when the bulls take profits, it creates a bull flag. However, beginners don't see it that way. When they see that pullback, they see a trend reversal, a reversal into a bear trend. This is profit taking from the bulls. Trying to reverse, trying to reverse, trying to reverse. See, it went up and down. Mostly profit taking from the bulls. It's a mistake to be selling even with limit orders when the channel is this tight. All of these reversals are mostly profit taking from the bulls. And as soon as it comes down a little bit, other bulls who have been waiting for a pullback are buying. Even if it drops just one bar below the low of the other bar. Here, one bar below, one bar below, one bar below. Traders who are flat or who do not yet have a full position are buying even the smallest pullbacks. That means there's a lot of urgency on the part of the bulls. If you get a big enough pullback, what becomes a major higher low, computers will tighten their stops to below that major higher low. And then anyone who buys after that point, they have a stop that is higher up, so the risk is less. So look at this trend. We have one and two bar pullbacks all the way up, and they do not drop very far. And the market keeps working higher. The sell signal bars do not look all that strong. When the bulls look at all of these reversal attempts, what they see is a bull flag forming. And they're looking for a reversal back up. So they're expecting the reversal down to be just a bar or two. And the bulls will buy with stops above the reversal bars, the bear breakouts. And the beginner looks at it and says, oh, that's still too high for me to buy. I want more of a pullback. The beginner does not take the trade. He says, you know, my stop still has to be down here. And I cannot risk that much. And what he should be doing is buying small. And just buying it in the tiniest position that he could buy at any point. Take any one of these high one bull flags and use the appropriate stop. So the beginner ends up missing a trend that goes on for 10, 20, 30, 40 bars. And the beginner oftentimes started to think, okay, this has gone on way too far. It's unsustainable. It's climactic. And therefore it should reverse. The trend cannot last forever. All strong trends are constantly forming wedges. One, two, three. One, two, three. One, two, three. However, when the channel is this tight, all of those wedges are going to fail. The beginner only sees the wedge. He doesn't see the tight channel. And he does not see the low probability. So that beginner who did not buy any of this now sees a reversal down. And he says, okay, a lower high. I got to sell. Maybe we'll get leg one, leg two, measure move down. Leg one, pull back, leg two. And my stop is small. So if I sell below here, maybe my stop is here. Maybe my stop is here. So I'm not risking very much. Yes, he's not risking very much, but he has terrible probability. When you have a tight, bold channel like this, the first reversal down, is minor and the bulls will buy it. Here we have a first reversal down. And guess what? Strong bulls are going to buy it. So that beginner who's been waiting for his pullback finally has his pullback. And he's selling far below the high, far too much below the high. And he's selling where smart bulls are just waiting to buy. So maybe the beginner will sell this bear flag and put a stop just above the high of that bar. Because he wants to reduce his risk. And that's just a terrible mistake. Because most reversal attempts fail. And this, I think, is a bull flag and more likely to go up. If it keeps going down for 20, 30 or 40 bars, then the probability is that we're in a bear trend, even though we did not have a major trend reversal. But at least 70% of the time, when you have a channel this tight and you get a bear breakout, it's going to be a bear leg in a trading range. And the bears will need a major trend reversal. In other words, they'll need one more attempt to resume up testing this high. And then a second entry short, double top. First, reversal down. And then a rally. And a second reversal down. And without that, chances are any reversal attempt is going to be minor. And the bulls will buy it. 80% rule. If the market's in a strong bull trend, it's always going to be forming tops. Usually wedge tops. But 80% of the tops will fail. Here we've got different ways to draw a wedge top. We talked about that a few minutes ago. And the beginner selling this lower high is betting on, well, maybe it's not quite a major reversal, but it's certainly a big reversal after a buy climax. And therefore, we should fall further. No, that's not true. Very tight bull channel. First reversal down. Probably bulls will buy it. Bulls were buying one bar pullbacks for 10, 20, 20. 30 bars. And now they get a chance to buy a five bar or a 10 bar pullback. Well, a lot of them will take that chance. If they were willing to buy a one bar pullback, and now they get to buy a much bigger pullback, and there's no clear convincing top they're going to buy. So the bear selling down here is selling at the bottom of what is at best a trading range. And at worst, it might be a pullback and a bull trend. Most of these tops become bull flags. And here, you can call this a wedge bull flag. You can call it a high two. You can call it a small double bottom. Different ways to draw the wedge. We got a slight pullback here. So first push down became a doji. And then second push, third push. Or you can say first push down, second push down, third push down. Doesn't matter. A bear channel is a bull flag, especially in a bull trend. Bulls are going to be buying a reversal up from that bear channel, expecting the trend to resume up. So that bear, who took this short below that bar and put his stop just above at this yellow line, because he did not want to risk much, lost money. The probability was probably 80% that he was going to lose money. So yes, he took a low risk trade. He did not lose money. But when he takes this trade, he's going to lose 80% of the time. And the 20% of the time that he wins, he will not manage it well enough to overcome those losses. So in a strong bull trend, the first reversal down is a bull flag, not a reversal. Yes, the beginner says, okay, well, at least I did not lose much. Well, if you lose a little bit of blood a thousand times, you've lost a lot of blood. These small losses add up and you can end up losing a lot of money. Now that beginner might think, okay, it's way overdone. And this didn't work. Now we've got two legs up here. Maybe it's a wedge one, two, three, and maybe a second entry short up here is worth taking. While it's a credible higher high major trend reversal, bull trend, bear breakout lasting a lot of bars, you know, 10 or more bars, and then resumption up. And then we've got a second leg up from here. This was likely to have a second leg while we have it. So there are decent reasons to sell, except one, very tight bull channel. A bear reversal is probably going to be a bull flag and we're going to resume up. And then how big are the pullbacks up here? Really small. You can also call this a tight bull channel and therefore the reversal down will probably fail. Even though this is a second entry sell, first entry, second entry, failed breakout, new high, it's still not enough selling pressure. Where are the big bear bars? Where is the evidence in the past 20, 30, 40 bars? Where's the evidence that the bears can take control? This is not much evidence. Yes, it's a short and it's a reasonable short, but it's a very low probability short and I would not take it. I've talked about this before as well. So you're taking a short, your stop is above this bar and you say, well, at least my risk is small. Whenever you have a very small risk, you always will have low probability. In other words, anytime you take any trade and you're using a very tight stop, you probably are going to get stopped out for a loss. You can say, well, it's a major trend reversal. So if it reverses down, I'll get a major profit, a very big profit. And that more than offsets the low probability, which is true. But it assumes that the low probability bet will be successful and that you'll manage it correctly. And most beginners will not. They'll get out with a small scalp profit, which means they're taking a small reward and that neutralizes their small risk. So they still have a weak risk reward and they're taking a low probability bet. So low probability and not a strong risk reward setup, you're going to lose money. What's going to happen to this bear taking this low risk trade. He's probably going to get stopped out. And he did. Okay. That beginner might keep arguing. Well, it's got to turn down at some point. It's way overdone. It just cannot keep going up. Probability has to be getting higher. He knows low probability, low probability. All he cared about was risk. And he's assuming that eventually the probability will go up and that he'll make money. Now we got a wedge, maybe a nested wedge, one, two, three, or nested into a larger wedge, one, two, three. So that's certainly higher probability. And look, the risk is small again. So if I sell below that doji, I get filled on this bear bar and my risk again is small. But small risk usually means low probability and a pretty tight bull channel, low probability. Bulls probably will buy. It's a credible higher high, major trend reversal, short. I would not take it. Just not enough bear bars anywhere on the screen to be selling, especially selling with stops too far below the high. That bear sells below this bar, his nested wedge. He gets filled right there on this bear bar and he sees this bear bar and he's happy, thinking that, okay, this is a higher probability short. It might be, but it's still a terrible short. Chances are bulls will buy that bear close and that will continue higher. Bulls will either buy the bear close or they'll wait for a bull follow through bar, bad follow through, a failed bear breakout, and they'll buy just above that bull bar, betting that the trend will continue. Like I said, 80% of reversal attempts in bull trends fail. Here, here, here. You just count, look at them all. Look at all these reversal attempts. Yet, the channel up is tight. There is an absence of big bear bars. The odds are every one of these reversal attempts will fail and the trend will keep going higher. Unfortunately, a beginner will look at this and he'll keep seeing wedges. Now we've got a new wedge. One, two, either one of these bars or three. And we're starting to get a pretty strong reversal down. So maybe I'll sell that close or sell this close. Arguing discipline. I have to be disciplined. I have to stick to my plan. And my plan is that I have to keep shorting this buy climax because it cannot last forever. And my losses are small. Losses are part of trading. And certainly each following reversal attempt will have higher and higher probability because trends tend to weaken. And here we've got a bull breakout above a bull channel and a reversal down. So that's certainly a higher probability. But it's still a low probability bet. Trends just tend to keep going up. And it's much better to keep buying bear closes, betting that the trend will resume back up and that these reversals will fail. So the beginner sees the bear bar, sells here or sells here, stopped just above. And he gets stopped out. The bull trend is just way too strong. The pullbacks are too small. They're too brief. And it's clearly still always in long. Traders should only be looking to buy. A huge bull trend day, yet the beginner lost money because he kept betting against the trend. Trends are always trying to reverse. They're always forming wedge tops. But they also can go a lot further than what traders think they possibly can do. So four losses. One, two, three, four. And they add up to a big loss. So a trader lost money during a very strong bull trend because he kept shorting all day, ignoring the low probability. All he sees is a tight stop and small risk. And therefore, I'm going to take the trade. But you need risk, reward, and probability to take a trade. And anytime you're taking a very low probability trade, by definition, if it's a low probability win, it's a high probability loss, you're going to lose most of the time. You will lose. So when a trend is strong, clearly always in long. You should only be buying. Why do markets exist? They exist for one reason. They allow people to trade at a fair price. And although you thought the price was too high, the buyers thought it was too low and it kept going higher. They need someone to sell to them. And you eagerly volunteer. And you cannot do that. Whenever a trend is very strong, you don't want to be the only person selling. In fact, you don't want to be selling at all. You can only look to buy. Markets are always trying to make traders trade. That's part of why they exist. They're trying to facilitate trading. They want more trading. So they're always doing things to make people act. They're always going to be doing something that will make traders uncomfortable and make them do something. For example, it makes beginners short all the way up. However, it often has to go very far, much further than what seems rational, to find out how far too far is. And how does it know that? Buyers stop buying. Volume dries up and no one's willing to buy. And then it'll start doing the opposite. It'll start probing down. So as long as you keep selling, you'll have to keep buying back with a loss. And if it cannot go down, it's going to keep going up until there's no one left to buy. Once the final weak bears, like beginners, stop selling, the strong bears begin to sell. And you ultimately do get a successful top. And there's no evidence of that happening on this chart. So a strong, bold friend, only look to buy. In this video, I talked about when a chart looks unclear and you cannot tell if it's in a bull trend or a bear trend, it's in a trading range. So anytime something is not clear, it's a trading range. A breakout is the strongest part of a trend. And it's a high probability bet that the trend will continue. 80% rule, most reversal attempts fail. 80% of reversal attempts will fail. So instead of selling in a strong, bold trend, you should be buying. Instead of buying in a strong bear trend, you should only be selling. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the second of five videos on trends. How is it for thisiation? How To Satsang. My double comes to Satsang. Some old ideas will not believe in theuvありがとうございました. So I'll post that line some time, you would interview the braids. How are it going to beуд buzzed? With all sorts of messages, you should be Stephen Cameron Сейчас. When I first opportunity for the other videos.