 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on trading broad bear channels. A bear trend needs lower highs, especially major lower highs. A major lower high is one that leads to a strong breakout to a new low. Second leg traps are common in broad bear channels because broad bear channels are very similar to trading ranges that are just a little bit more. Trading ranges that are just sloped down somewhat. You get a strong second leg and traders think it's going to lead to a strong breakout with follow through. Yet it quickly reverses and traps traders into either buying too high or selling too low. Because the channel is basically a trading range that's sloped downward, bulls can make money by buying new lows and adding on lower. And a lot of times they'll use wide stops. In a bear trend, bears trail their stops to above the most recent major lower high. A major lower high is a lower high that leads to a strong reversal down or a strong breakout usually to a new low. So this is a major lower high. And similar to this, we've got a strong breakout. At this point, this is a major lower high after you've had a strong breakout, even though it's still not yet to a new low. And as soon as the market makes a new major lower high, has that strong breakout, wherever the bears had their stops before, they moved their stops to just above the most recent major lower high. And that is called trailing the stop. We have a strong breakout to new low. Is this a major high? Well, it probably is after that many bars down. A lot of traders would still consider this to be the major lower high because this reversal up is so minor. Took a lot of bars, but we broke to a new low. We have a gap down and another breakout here. So this is a major lower high. Now, is this a major lower high? We broke strongly to a new low. Some traders would consider this a major lower high and they'd put their stop above. And if they got stopped out, they would sell on the reversal down. When you have a sell-off that has repeated reversals, a lot of traders go all the way back and label this as a real major lower high. It has other highs that are fairly major here and here, but a lot of traders would keep their stop here until the market broke strongly to a new low. Maybe here, maybe here. It's unclear to me. Some traders would get out here and say this is major. Others would do here. Both are okay. When you use a tighter stop, you're going to get stopped out more. When you use a wider stop, you get stopped out less often. And as I said, if you do get stopped out, you just sell again on a reversal back down. We have a breakout below a bull channel, a bear flag, strong breakout. Therefore, this is a major lower high. We have another strong breakout here. At this point, after a little bit of follow through, even though it's not at a new low, a lot of traders would consider this pretty major. And if the market rallied above it, they would get out, but sell again on a reversal down. This is clearly major. Certainly by this point. We have a breakout to a new low. Pretty strong breakout. The bears do not want to see the market get above this high because if it does, then they think that maybe it's no longer in a bear trend. It might now be either in a trading range or a bull trend. So they get out. And if there's a strong reversal down, they'll look to sell again. Here, three bull bars, one pretty good. They might not sell here. Here, a micro double top, micro triple top, but a bull bar, they might not sell there. And as I said, sometimes you have to back up and ignore the minor reversals and just look at the top of the major reversals down and call that a major lower high. Because a lot of times the market will make what appears to be fairly major new legs down, but the market goes above it and does not go above more significant lower highs. It's a different style of trading. Some traders prefer to use the very wide stops and not get stopped out unless the market clearly is no longer in a bear trend. Other traders tend to get out above major tops that are not quite as major. And then if the bear trend resumes, they'll sell again. Broad bear channel. Most traders are not going to let their stops get hit. This is a very strong reversal up. It's a minor reversal. It's a reversal in a bear channel. Maybe it's major. Some traders might call it a double bottom or a low low major trend reversal. I'm not convinced that it's a major reversal. I would assume that this is fairly minor after this strong a sell up. However, this is a very strong minor reversal up. And therefore, traders will pay attention to the next reversal up because after a very strong minor reversal, the next reversal is often major. And especially if there are other reasons to buy. Here we have a micro double bottom and a nested wedge. Three reversals up. One, two, three. And then one, two, three. When there are minor reversals and then sell offs that are not particularly strong, traders look at every one of these minor reversals down as minor lower highs. And rather than buying on a stop above those, bears will sell with limit orders at that high and scale in higher and keep a stop above the most recent major high. When the market goes above minor highs like above this or above that or above this, bears assume the rally will fail and the bear trend will resume. Therefore, yes, it's rallying for 30 or 40 bars, but it's still more likely a bull leg in a trading range or a broad bear channel than the start of a bull trend, even though there's a high or low major trend reversal. Remember, most major trend reversals, 60% of them, do not lead to bull trends. They lead to either a trading range or a resumption of the bear trend. Again, some bears would sell above this high, arguing maybe this is not all that major. It's still part of a fairly tight channel here. And maybe this is the major lower high and these are minor lower highs. So these bears would sell with a limit order here and put a stop above what they believe is a much more major lower high. At this point, the market has a wedge and it has a nested wedge because there's a second wedge here. The third leg down subdivides into a wedge. Because it's a bear trend, even though it's sideways for a lot of the time, a lot of traders prefer only to look for the shorts. We have a strong breakout to a new low. The market's clearly always in short at somewhere in here. They'll look at these pullbacks as simply deep pullbacks in a broad bear channel as long as the market continues to make lower highs. The market, when it's in a broad bear channel, will often be always in long. Like for example, by the close of this bar, it's always in long. Chances are it'll either go sideways for a second leg or up. And the same here. The market is probably always in long, maybe by the close of this bar, by the close of that bar. Yet, always in long, it's still in a new low. Always in long, strong breakout, but look to the left. It's not above all the bars to the left. And therefore, in fact, it could be a second leg trap. One pullback two, or one pullback to a new low and then two. A two legged correction, one pullback two, where the pullback goes below the low of the first leg. Since the past couple of days have been in a broad bear channel, the bears will keep selling every reversal down from what they believe is a minor trend reversal. So, at rallies, they'll sell, stop up here. Rallies, they'll sell, stop up here or here. And we have a double top. You can call it a wedge. One, two, three. With two and three form a double top. Traders going to look to sell reversals down. Strong rally, but not above truly major lower highs. They'll sell. Here, strong rally above what some traders would consider a major lower high. But a bear bar, it's not above bigger lower highs. Traders will assume it's a bull leg in the trading range and they'll sell a reversal down. The traders who sell, some traders will scalp thinking that maybe it will stay in a trading range. And if they do, they should always be trading for at least the minimum scalp, which is one point in the E-mini. And they want to get out with at least twice their actual risk unless there's a high probability short. And shorting in a trading range like this is not all that high probability. So if a trader sells below that bear bar, his actual risk, this pullback got just up to that bar. So his actual risk is a little bit above that yellow line. And two times actual risk is here. And you can see what happened when it got down here. It rallied because bulls were buying what they thought was a higher low, major trend reversal. And bears were buying back their shorts at around two times actual risk. The bears will take profits once they reach their scalp goal or on a reversal up, even if it's not quite at their profit target. They sell here, two legs down, maybe a wedge bull flag, one, two, three. They'll buy on a reversal up, especially a second reversal up, one pullback and then two. The bears who are selling here, a second entry short, one, two, are selling because they believe it's in a broad bear channel. They will look to take profits at the prior low or on a reversal up like here. The bears selling here, their actual risk is small, but they may want to take profits at some kind of a measured move target like here. We have a head and shoulders top. We don't know what's to the left, but it could be a head and shoulders top and a bull trend. It could be head and shoulders top, bear flag, and a bear trend. In any case, they'll look for a measured move down based upon the height of that lower high. The bulls were trying to get a double bottom and it failed. So instead of breaking above the neckline and rallying for a measured move up, the bears will look for a measured move down. Test of the low close. Remember you have seller close bears selling every bear close. Market reversed up. There's support at the test of the low close. There's support at the bottom of the buy signal bar and the bottom of the buy entry bar. Those are also support areas and that is an area where the bears will look to take profits. Or at the new low. Bottom of the channel. Some bears will take profits with the limit order at that trend chain line or on a reversal up, especially a second reversal up. One pullback two, especially at a new low. I mentioned second leg traps. I want to talk more about it here. A bird bear channel is similar to a trading range that's sloped downward and therefore has a lot of characteristics of trading ranges. And one of the common things in a trading range is the market has a lot of two legged moves and the second leg is often very strong. Leading traders to believe that it's on the verge of breaking out into a trend. But most trend attempts fail when the market's in a trading range and reverse. And that strong second leg simply traps traders into buying too high. In a broad bear channel, you can get second leg traps up or down. For example, we have a rally and then we have a second leg up to a new high and it's an even stronger rally. It's a breakout above that high. Consecutive bull bars. However, you look to the left and we're still below the top of what could be a bear trend at this point. And therefore, this might be a trap. It's strong enough up so that we might get a second leg up or sideways. One pullback two. And we did. But you got to be careful if you're buying up here. You have to use a wide stop and you probably have to scale in because instead of this being the start of a bull trend, it could be the end of a two legged correction in a trading range or in a bear trend. And you can see right here, the market tested the top of that strong bull breakout and failed and the bulls finally gave up. And the bears knew the bulls would give up and the bears sold as well. This is an example of two legs down and a bear trend. We gapped down, we rallied and we sold off very strongly. Bears are hoping that the market will collapse and accelerate downward. But it's still a broad bear channel, which is similar to a trading range. And therefore, you can get two legs down that trap traders into thinking the bear trend is becoming stronger. Sell the closed bears might sell here, but if they're quick thinking, they'll be disappointed by the doji bar. And then certainly disappointed by the bull bar that followed here. And they'll get out fearful that this is simply a second leg trap at the bottom of a bear channel. The bears have sold that close. Three consecutive bear closes are disappointed by the next three bars and a lot of them got out. And if they did not get out on the test of that low close over here or anywhere in this tight range, they gave up here. You can see this bull breakout starting to reverse the sell up. And this represents bears buying back their shorts. And it also represents bulls buying, expecting a leg up in a broad bear channel. And the final bears gave up here. They did not give up here. They gave up here. And this became a two legged trap going up in the bear channel. Leg one, pull back two. Or leg one, pull back two, where the pullback is below the bottom of the first leg up. This is very similar to that. And they're close to one another in proximity. So they're probably part of the same process. This is the first leg, pull back, second leg, trapping traders into buying too high. But look to the left. You're still within a bear channel or trading range. And you do not want to be buying too high in a broad bear channel or in a trading range. Traders who buy up here are probably going to get trapped. Trading ranges often have two legs up and down. And broad bear channels often have two legs up and down. And a lot of times the legs up last a lot of bars and are strong enough to make the market always in long. At least on a five minute chart. This is several days on the five minute chart. Nobody's going to be trading a chart that looks like this. This is basically a line chart. It's a bar chart where the bars are compressed together to show many hundreds of bars. If you're going to be trading this many days, you're not going to be using the five minute chart to do it. You'll try using a 15 minute or 60 minute chart. In any case, if you were simply looking at the five minute chart, the rally up would be strong enough to make the market always in long. And the same right here. This might be 30 or 40 bars up. And if we were only looking at these 100 bars, this rally would be strong enough to make that chart always in long. Like one strong enough. So we'll probably get a second leg sideways to up. We have it. Once the market's always in long, you only have about a 40% chance of a major reversal back down. But when it comes, it often is fast. Here we gapped down and covered a lot of points simply on the open of the day. This is, you can argue, a higher high major trend reversal. We have a bull trend lasting a couple of days, a bear breakout, and then a higher high. It's also a wedge top, one, two, three, and a lower high and a broad bear channel. But if you're simply trading a five minute chart, you're only looking at these two days at this point. You have to be careful that this might be a higher high major trend reversal. Any major trend reversal has only a 40% chance of actually leading to a major reversal. So bull trend, 40% chance of becoming a bear trend. But when it happens, it can happen pretty quickly. If the bears got out for any reason during this stretch where the market was always in long, they have to be looking to sell again if they're looking back at the past several days and seeing that the market's in a broad bear channel. It's a higher high major trend reversal, which is a type of double top. So we have a double top, we have a neckline. The goal for the bears is at least a measured move down. A similar thing here. We have a double top, neckline. Goal for the bears is a measured move down. I always look at the measured move based upon the lower of the two highs as the first target. And if it goes below that, then I'll look at a measured move based upon the higher of the two highs. Traders are always paying attention to how far a breakout goes below a breakout point, because they expect the next breakout to be similar. And once you've looked at a number of these breakouts and compared them to breakout points, you have an idea of how far the next breakout will probably go before the bulls come in and start to buy. Strong breakout below a prior low. This is the breakout point and that's the breakout. And how far did this low go below that low? Here, 26 ticks. This low, this breakout went 62 ticks below that breakout point. And then you can see other breakouts, how big they are. Bulls like to buy below prior lows and they'll pay attention to how far lows have been below breakout points to get an idea of where they should buy. Should they buy exactly at the prior low or should they look to buy a certain number of ticks below that prior low? This breakout point, 26 below the breakout. 24 tick breakout here. Traders see this reversing up 26 ticks below that. We'll expect that if we get around 26 ticks below here, we'll probably reverse up. And therefore, bulls will look to place a limit order to buy 20 ticks, 25 ticks, 26 ticks below that low, expecting a similar reversal. If you're taking limit order trades against a trend, first of all, you should only do it if you're a very experienced trader. And next, usually it's better to use a wider stop and then scale in, which means you should be trading very small. A lot of the bulls who buy below a prior low will take profits at the prior low or somewhere above that prior low. Some traders will buy with a limit order at that low and then scale in more lower and get out break even at their original buy and then with a profit on their lower entry. Or they can take profits on a reversal down. Let's say a trader did not buy at that low and instead bought about 20 ticks below that low. And they expect the market to reverse up and retrace about half of the most recent bare leg. Therefore, they'll take profits in that general area, especially on a reversal down. Or they'll see a reversal up like this and think it's strong enough to get a second leg up. And because the second leg up is still probably a bare leg in a bare channel or in a trading range, they'll look to sell at that high or on a reversal down from that high. Markets making lower highs, lower lows, therefore a bare channel. Some traders will sell the lower high. They want to be selling somewhere in the middle third or the upper half of the most recent leg down. They know the last bear breakout was 26 ticks below the breakout point. So where will the bears take profits if they sell here? Well, they expect a new low and therefore they're not going to be taking profits here. They want to be taking profits at least at this low or they'll decide that maybe it's going to go lower. This breakout went 26 ticks below that. Maybe the breakout will be 10, 20 ticks below here. So some of them will try to take profits a little bit lower than that low. Maybe take profits half the distance of the size of that breakout. This is 26 ticks. Maybe take profits 13 ticks below this low or on the reversal up. Big gap down. When the market is forming gaps, bears are more likely to swing and bulls are more likely to wait to buy. Well, you can see we gap down here below that low. Will bulls immediately buy on the open, betting that the gap will close? Some would do that. However, others would stop buying and wait until the market is entering a stairs pattern again. If you're buying in a bear trend, you want to see reversals right after the market makes a new low. And you want the pullbacks to go at least halfway up the most recent bear leg. And at times when the bear trend is particularly strong, it's usually better not to buy until the bear trend starts to weaken again. This pullback slightly overlaps this breakout point and it almost touches this breakout point exactly. So, therefore, this high, which is leading to a reversal down, could be a fairly major high. And it's testing all of these lows and not getting much above them. These lows are therefore major. Therefore, this line is important. It's important resistance and it often leads to a measured move down. So, we know this line is important. It was support and then it became resistance. I look to the left to find a major lower high, which is right here. And this point is major. It led to a strong breakout to a new low. This line is major. When you have two major points, they often create a third major point, a measured move down. If it falls below a measured move based upon that, which it did, traders will then look to the left for another major point and look for a measured move based upon that. The entire bear trend, we're breaking out below. Maybe it'll fall for a measured move down. Whenever you get a breakout and then a pullback that goes above the breakout point, I call that a stairs pattern. So, the market is stair stepping down. The pullbacks are going above the breakout points. That means that bulls can make money buying in a bear trend. It's still always better to be selling in a bear trend, but the bulls can make money. Bears who sell reversals down from the middle of the most recent bear leg will look to take profits around the prior low, betting that the market will again pull back to the middle of the current bear leg. The bulls see what's going on as well. They see rallies going above breakout points and they'll buy for a scalp somewhere back up to the middle of the most recent bear leg. Sometimes they'll buy at the prior low and scale in lower and just scalp out when it gets back to the breakout point. Other times they'll buy at reversal up and exit somewhere in the middle of the most recent bear leg. Traders are always drawing lines. When the market reverses down and then reverses down a second time, they can draw a line. And they see what the market does when it gets to that line. If it stalls, they'll look to sell at reversal down. Market reverse down, reverse down again, draw a line. And you can see traders sold around that line. You reverse down, you can draw a new line. And traders just keep doing that all day long. The market reverse down, reverse down a second time, draw a line. And when above the line, reverse down. You can draw a new line using that new high. We then reverse down strongly here. Go to the left. You can use this high or that high. Draw a new line using this high. Draw a new line using this high. And watch what happens when the market gets there. A lot of traders will look to sell at that line or on reversal down from that line. It's a channel. All trends are in channels. And traders also draw lines using lows. The market reversed up here, reversed up here. They draw a line and see what happens if the market gets to that line. It broke below it, reversed up. You can now draw another line from this low and that reversal and you get this. And you wait to see what happens here. You look for a reversal up. We have two reversals, ED�iejем tradeoper comparisons. We have two reversals, EDU whom you can draw a line next year to the market. You can draw up the line for右 têm ... This road export development stopped but you can then swing here with one options.. And then Scholars Road and you go with a reversal up. We then draw down. You can do that If the market is sitting in a closed room close there. This area is running towards the proposal. Let's say let's look towards table. When you make a reversal drop drop see. These areas are looking for the reversalся and just keep doing that in a lange zone. If you don't see any economPN market. doing that all the time. When the market's in a channel, especially one with fairly broad swings, 75% of the time when it's trying to break above the top or below the bottom of the channel, the breakout attempts will fail and the market will have at least a minor reversal. And therefore, whenever the market goes above the line, traders sell a reversal down. Above the line, sell. Above the line, sell. Above the line, sell. And the opposite true at the bottom. When it breaks below a line, traders look to buy a reversal up. When it's in a bear trend, especially a fairly steep trend, traders will focus more on selling. However, as long as the reversals up are fairly strong, bulls will buy as well. When bulls are buying in a bear trend, first of all, only experienced traders should be doing that. They'll be using wide stops and they'll often scale in. Some bulls buy with a limit order at the prior low. They see the market selling off. They'll place a limit order to buy at this low and they'll get filled right here. Where should their stop be? Well, maybe a measure moved down from the height of this leg. The bulls are thinking that. We have a rally. We have a pullback. Maybe we'll get a double bottom and break above the neckline for a measured move up. On the other hand, the bears will want a breakout below and a measured move down. And therefore, a lot of the bulls who are going to scale in will put a stop just below a measured move down. Leg down. Leg down. Some bulls will buy at that low with a limit order and put a stop down here. And they're willing to scale in more if the market falls a little bit further. Same thing here. The market reversed up. Theoretically, it could have formed a double bottom here and rallied above the neckline of the double bottom for a measured move up. If instead it falls, the bears will look for a measured move down. It's in a stairs pattern, so the bulls assume that it will not fall for the measured move down. And instead that there'll be buyers at or just below that low. So they'll buy with a limit order at that low, get filled here and put a stop a little bit below the measured move target. Same thing. Here you can see it got very close to the stop, yet it's still reversed up. If you're scalping longs in a bull trend, you should always go for at least a minimum scalp. In the E-mini, a minimum scalp is one point. And you should also be going for at least twice your actual risk. If a trade is high probability, you can scalp out at one times your actual risk. Some bulls will take profits at a fixed number of ticks, like 4 points, 16 ticks. Buying here, getting out there. Others will take profits at a resistance level. It's a bear trend, so they expect a lower high, so if they buy here. They expect resistance at about a 50% pullback from the height of the bear leg, and they'll get out of here, even though it's a smaller profit than they may have wanted. Others prefer to hold in case it becomes a bull trend, knowing that it probably will not. They buy here, and they'll look to sell on a reversal down somewhere in the middle third of the most recent bear leg. Let's say a bull bought here. Whether or not he scaled in here, he might try to get out at his original entry price. After such a big sell-off, he's now concerned that it's not going to rally very much. And let's say it did not get above his entry price. So this high did not get above that low. So a bull who bought here, disappointed by this, tries to get out break even. It gets right near his price, but not above it. He'll then exit with a loss on a reversal down. A lot of experienced traders will buy small, and they'll scale in lower and use a wide stock. By scaling in, you're increasing your probability. But anytime you improve your probability on the trade, because of the trader's equation, you have to reduce your risk reward. And that usually means you're increasing your risk and reducing your profit. Again, you should always be trading small enough so that your risk is not bigger than it is on any other trade. A bull buying here might trade very small. He knows where his stop is. He'll maybe use a measured move down, just below the measured move down, this black line. And maybe he'll scale in at fixed intervals, like five points below his entry price, five points, five points, and then get out of the entire position if it hits the stop. If you're scaling in, you have to be trading very small. You're scaling in for one reason, to increase the chances of making money. That means you're trying to increase your probability. And you have to accept greater risk, a greater position size, stop further away. That means you're getting worse risk reward as the price that you're paying to get the higher probability of making money. If a trader does buy here and he's willing to scale in, he can also scale in at a 50% move down to his stop. So he buys here and he knows where his stop is, maybe buy more halfway down to the stop. For the traders, in fact, this is what I like to do is they'll buy here and then wait for a reversal up, especially if there's a pretty good bull bar and then buy more above that bull bar, betting that the market will come back to their entry price and they can get out break even on their original buy and with a profit on their lower buy. And as I said, if it starts to turn down without filling your limit order here, you get out as it turns down a small loss on your first buy and a bigger profit on your lower buy. There's a second reason why traders sometimes scale in. One obviously is to make money. And the second is to avoid a loss. So if they buy and they're disappointed by the extent of the sell off, they may buy more lower and then to avoid a loss, try to get out in between their two entry prices. One thing that I like to do and some traders do as well is instead of taking a buy at that low, they know some scale in traders will do that and scale in more lower, especially above a good bull bar. We cannot see this bar, so we don't know if it has a strong bull body, but if it does, a lot of bulls will buy more above that strong bull bar. A lot of times what I'll do is not take the first entry, wait for the strong bull bar and buy above the bull bar expecting it to come back to that first entry. And if it gets near there and starts to reverse down, you get out on the reversal down. I want to show a closeup of what I was talking about. This little blue box I'm going to expand on the next slide. Remember I said that some bulls will buy with a limit order here and then buy more above a strong bull bar expecting the market to get back to their original entry price. So on the next slide, let's take a look at just this blue box. Okay, this is the slide that I just showed you. And this is a closeup of it. So bulls bought here, which is a test of that low right there. And then some bulls will buy more above a bull bar, either above this bull bar or above that bull bar expecting the market to get back here where they can get out. They can take even on their first entry and with a profit on their lower entry. Other traders do not take this entry if they think the trend is strong and they'll simply look to buy where the scale end bulls will buy and then take profits when it gets up to where the scale end bulls will get out. If it gets there and reverses down, especially with a decent bear bar, they'll get out below the low of that bar right here. So those traders will buy here or here and then get out here with a profit. This is the stop, which is below the measured move target. Because it's a strong bear bar, even though there's a very strong rally, there's a bear bar closing on its low and it's a breakout test. It's testing that breakout point over there to the left, which is this low and it's reversing the right down. Traders know that when you have a strong rally in a broad bear channel or a trading range, it could very well be a second leg trap. You have a first leg up and then sideways and then a second leg up. Unless it breaks above all the bars to the left, there's a reasonable chance, maybe 50-50 chance it's a second leg trap. Trapping traders into holding long, hoping for a bull trend or buying high, hoping for a bull trend. But more likely it's a second leg up in a broad bear channel or in a trading range. And if it starts to reverse down, you have to get out of longs because bears will be selling. If you're buying new lows in a bear trend, you have to get out if the bear breakout becomes too big. Let's say you bought at that low, which I would not do when the channel down is as strong as this is. I would not take that buy. But some bulls will buy because they'll see, oh, we have a strong breakout here. They made money buying at that low. Same here. Strong breakout to new low. They made money buying at that low and lower. And therefore, if we have a strong breakout again, they can buy at the low and buy more or lower and either avoid a loss or make a profit if they scale in and use wide stops. And that's an important if. That's one of the reasons why this strategy is bad for beginners because they will not manage the trade correctly. Experienced traders will do it knowing that they'll either make a profit or if they scale in and manage their trade well, they'll at least be able to avoid a loss. Let's say you buy with a limit order at that low. And instead of using the height of the trading range for a stop, a measure move down, some traders might use two times the size of the biggest prior breakout. Here's a low. Here's the breakout. Here's a breakout below that low. Here's a breakout. Here's a breakout. Here's a breakout. The biggest prior breakout was 26 ticks. This low went 26 ticks below that low. And to give themselves a buffer, they might place a stop at two times that down here. This is a 26 tick breakout. And maybe they'll put a stop at a 52 tick breakout thinking that the breakout probably will be similar to these two. But they certainly don't want to hold long if it's more than twice as big as these two. Here, this breakout was 62 ticks below that low. You always have to have a reason to get out. And as long as the reason is reasonable, it makes sense, then it's okay to take the loss. You can always buy on the reversal up. Like I said, a lot of traders will buy above a bull bar knowing that limit order bulls will buy there and buy more above the bull bar. So if you did get stopped out, you can immediately buy again above a bull bar expecting the market to get back up there. And then you can exit on a test of the prior low or on a reversal down. For example, if you bought at this low and exited on a stop at 52 ticks, you lose 52 ticks. And then if you held and exited on a reversal down, you'd make 45 ticks on this trade. So you lose 52, you make 45 and you'd have a net loss of seven ticks. Many traders like to enter on second reversals. So we reversed up the bear trend trying to resume and we're trying to reverse up a second time. So we have a small micro double bottom. That is a higher probability buy. Minimum scalp in the E-mini, four ticks, one point. Minimum reward is one to two times the actual risk. And if the probability is high, 60% or better, you can exit at one times that actual risk. As long as you're going for at least a four tick, one point scalp. Let's say you bought on the reversal up, although you can't see this because I don't have it zoomed in. The actual risk was four ticks, two times the actual risk was eight ticks. And the market went high enough up for you to get your eight tick scalp. If you're looking at a channel where the rallies are 10 or 20 points tall and two times your actual risk is only two points, that's probably too small a profit and you should be going for more money. For example, you might double it and go for a profit of four or five points and get out here. Or you can get out at a 50% pullback of the most recent bare leg. So bare leg, 50% pullback, get out there. Or you can look at this strong leg up. Maybe the market will have a second leg up and then you can get out at this high or on a reversal down. Bear trends need lower highs, especially major lower highs. If the market goes above a major lower high, then it's either in a bull trend or a trading range. It's no longer in a bear trend and therefore you do not want to be holding short. You get out on a stop above a major lower high. Whenever the market's in a channel or a trading range, second leg traps are common. The market has a very strong second leg and you think that the market's converting from a channel into a trend, but it traps traders into buying too high. If it's a second leg trap up or selling too low. If it's a strong second leg down. Because the reversals up go for a lot of bars and cover a lot of points, bulls can buy below bars and make money. More experienced traders will use wide stops and scale in. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on trading broad bear channels. This includes how on worshipped traders, the first one year created a propagation of grain emerge. The Fire Spears Association