 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading tight bull channels. I'll begin by talking about scaling into trades. I also want to make the very important point that if the bears cannot make money selling, then the bull trend is strong and bears should not start to sell. They should wait to sell until they see other bears making money. The bulls have a breakout and then a one bar pullback and then about a 10 bar bull micro channel and a couple bars down, one bar down, three bar pullback. A pretty tight bull channel. Even if a bear sells at the prior high and scales in, the pullbacks for the most part are not deep enough to make even a scalp. And most bears will not short until they start to believe that the channel is ending and transitioning into a trading range or at least a broad channel. selling above this high, not making money selling at this high scaling in higher, very difficult to make money. Stop entry bears is even more difficult to make money selling below that low, selling below this low or that low or that low or this low for that matter. In general, when a channel is tight and you look at it and you see that it's difficult for the bears to make money, you should only be looking to buy. And every time you see a stop entry sell, a reversal attempt, you should assume it will fail. The bears will not make money and they'll have to buy back their shorts. And therefore bulls will be buying every reversal attempt, betting that the bears will lose. When the market's in a bull trend, the bulls are always looking for reasons to take at least partial profits and they'll take partial profits above prior highs or at prior highs. For example, they might take some partial profits here and that creates a small pullback. We got a new high here. Some of the bulls will take partial profits again, a pullback. So the pullbacks are common and that's what creates a channel. We have a breakout, a spike, and then we start getting little pullbacks as bulls take partial profits. Once they see the bears are unable to reverse the market, the bulls buy again, betting that the reversal attempt will be a bull flag and that the bull trend will continue higher. When the pullbacks are small like this, most bears will not short. The bears certainly are not going to be holding for a swing trade, looking to sell more as the market's going down. In general, bears will not sell until they see evidence that bears can make money selling. On the other hand, the bulls are eager to buy the reversal attempts because they believe each one will become a bull flag and that the bull trend will resume. Until the bears are consistently making money, bulls are going to buy aggressively. The bears, they see a spike, pullback, second push, pullback, third push. So a wedge bull channel and they got a reversal down. Initial target, the beginning of the channel, the bottom of the channel down here. However, when a channel is tight like this, for example, there's not a pullback in 10 bars, bulls are going to be eager to buy at or below the low of the prior bar. They've been buying above the low of the prior bar for 10 bars. Therefore, when you get a very tight bull channel, it does not matter that there is a wedge. If the channel is a wedge, but the pullbacks are very small, it's not going to lead to much of a reversal. And it's better to be looking to buy below the low of the prior bar than to sell. Therefore, even though someone might look at this and say, oh, it's a spike pullback channel, it should test down to the beginning of the channel. No, when the channel is this tight, the reversal is going to be minor and become a bull flag. And more likely you'll get a measured move up based upon the height of the wedge. Breakout, measured move up. I want to be clear about this. Whenever you have a channel and you have a bull breakout above the channel, the initial target is the bottom of the channel, the bull trend line here. But when the channel is tight, that target is not far enough for a scalp and therefore traders cannot sell. If this was going to be a successful reversal, the target for the bears would be the beginning of the channel. Sometimes I call that the bottom of the channel, but it's really the beginning of the channel. The bottom of the channel is the bull trend line here. The initial target for bears looking to sell a wedge top is the bottom of the channel, which is the bull trend line. Their next target is the beginning of the wedge. Whenever a bear is looking to sell a reversal down from a failed breakout above a bull channel, he's going to be selling with a stop below the reversal bar. And his first target is the bull trend line, the bottom of the channel. However, when the channel is tight, you're selling at the first downside target. And therefore there's not much profit to be made. If the channel were broader, you might be hoping to get a move down to the beginning of the channel, but that's not likely when the channel is this tight. The lesson is whenever you have a tight bull channel, never sell with a stop. Bulls will buy where you're going short and they will win and you will lose. When the market is channeling up like this, some bears will sell every new high and scale in sometimes one or two or even three times as the market's going up. Once there's a reasonably strong breakout like this and a follow through bar, the bears will stop selling. So a bear who sold here would probably get out and take the loss. And some traders would reverse the long, expecting that the market would recover their loss. So if they sell at this high, they buy on the close of the follow through bar and then exit to recover the size of the loss that they made on their original sell. Let's say for example, bears look at this as a trading range and he sold with a limit order at this high, he'd get filled right here. Maybe he would risk about five points. Maybe a measured move up based upon the height of that range. If he risked about five points or so, his stop might be up here. Why would he want to risk about five points? Let's say he's looking to scale in at one point intervals. He might scale in once or twice, sometimes even three times. He knows that if he has to scale in five times, four or five times, he's in a losing trade, he's going to lose money. And therefore, if he puts a stop four or five points above the first entry and his premise is valid, he should be okay. If a stop gets hit, the market's telling him that his premise is wrong. It's a catastrophic stop. You put the stop far away. You're never planning on letting the stop get hit. Usually there'll be evidence that you're wrong before the stop gets hit. And once you see that evidence, you get out. For example, if you had a limit order to sell at this high, and then you saw a bull bar closing on its high, you might want to get out if the next bar is a bull bar. So you exit on the close here or on the close here and do not wait for that stop to be hit. A trader, a bear, might sell at this high, and you might have limit orders in the market to sell more one point higher, two points higher, three points higher. After a strong bull bar like this closing above the high of the past ten bars, most traders would cancel their orders to scale in one or two or three points higher. They would wait to see what the market does before they'd scale in. If a trader did scale in one, two or three points higher. He would probably look to get out break even on this first entry. In other words, on a pullback to below this breakout point. And you can see the market went one tick below. Even with that strong bear reversal, it still resumed back up. And this was a pullback from this breakout and not a reversal. The bears were lucky here. If a bear took this short and sold more one, two, three points higher, he made profit on his three scale in entries and he could all break even on his first entry. As I said, most traders, if they see a strong bull breakout bar like this and they had a limit order to sell at this high, they'd get filled. But they would not sell one point higher. They might place a limit order to sell two or three points higher and then try to avoid a loss and get out at the midpoint between their second entry. Let's say they sold three points higher and their first entry. They would be so disappointed by the breakout and follow through that they think the market's going higher. They simply want to get out to avoid a loss and not worry about a profit. In this particular case, if a trader did sell here and more here and more here and more here, he was lucky. He got out break even, the market fell one tick below his original entry at that high. He made one point on his first scale in trade, two points on the second and three points on his third. He made a total of six points. However, what was his risk? If he had a five point stop, his risk was five points on the first entry, four points on the second, three points on the third. And if he got filled on a fourth, he would have had two points risk on that. And his total risk was 14 points. Yet he only made six points. That means you need an extremely high winning percentage to make this profitable. And that's beyond what most traders can do. The scale in bear in this particular case ended up risking 14 points to make six points. Can that result in a positive traders equation? Well, it can. Scaling into any trade increases the probability of success, the probability of making money, the probability of avoiding loss. However, it comes at the price of increased risk. In a situation like this, you have to be probably 90% certain of making money, doing the scale in trade to take the trade. Because if you're risking more than two times your reward, it's not worth taking the trade unless you're 90% confident that you're going to succeed. 90% certainty is very rare. Even expert traders rarely will look at a trade and say, oh yeah, there's a 90% chance I'm going to make money. Again, you pay for high probability with bad risk reward. If you're scaling into a trade, you're increasing the probability of making money, but you're paying for it with increased risk and usually diminished reward. Most experts would not scale in like this. As I said, if they took this short, they might scale in once they see the big tail on this breakout bar. But most would simply get out and take a loss. An expert will only scale into a trade if he can look at the trade and structure it in a way so that he feels like he has a reasonably good traders equation. And when I say structure a trade, I mean you have to have a plan with several alternatives and you have to be willing to make very quick changes. And that's something that beginners cannot do. So beginners should not be scaling into trades, especially scaling into trades against a trend. It's a different thing to be scaling into trades with the trend. For example, buying this bar and then buying more above here, a high two bill flag or here, a triangle. That is something beginners can do if their account is big enough and if they're trading small enough. I talked about how if this stop got hit, the bears who took all of these trades, scaling into their trade, would lose 14 points. However, as I said, it's really important to know that experienced traders are not going to let that happen. They'll rarely ever let their wide stop get hit. They'll decide that their trade is bad long before their stop gets hit and they'll get out with a much smaller loss. You're not going to keep adding to a trade once you decide the trade is bad. So for example, let's say you took the first entry selling here and you placed a limit order to sell more here and you get filled at the high of that bar. Most traders will just get out at the market or they'll get out on that close. You're going to decide that the premise is bad and that we're going higher. And if you're fast enough, not only will you get out, you'll buy looking for at least a small second leg up. For scale in traders, most of the losers and winners are only one to three points. But if you're winning more than 60% of the time, that is a very profitable strategy. High probability can offset bad risk reward. Bad risk reward means big risk and small profits. And that's usually what you're doing if you're scaling into shorts in a bull trend. If the channel is broad, a skilled trader can scale in to shorts above prior highs and win 90%. 90% of the times. His average win might be three points, might be more. So if he takes 10 trades and has nine wins each for three points, he wins a total of 27 points. And if he loses one time times 14 points, he would have a 14 point loss compared to his 27 points win. Again, that is not this trade. That is if the channel is broad, which this is not. And a very tight channel here. We have at this point, a six or seven bar bull micro channel. That's a tight channel. All the way up here. No pullback for 10 bars. Very tight channel. Anyone scaling in is going to be disappointed. And he's going to exit pretty quickly. So for example, if a trader did take this short and he sold any of these additional shorts, he'll probably try to avoid a loss rather than make a profit. That means that instead of holding, hoping to get out break even on this first entry, he'll look at his average price and simply hope that the market comes down far enough so that it reaches his average entry price, allowing him to get out break even on his entire trade. This means that the trader taking the short. And if he looks at the rally, he's saying, oh, this is too strong. I'm going to give up my idea of making a profit. I'm simply going to scale in to avoid a loss, thinking that there'll be a pullback that drops far enough so that I can get out without a loss. And if he does, it'll fall below my average entry price, my first entry and whatever my second entry is. When the channel is tight, if you are scalping shorts, your average wind is probably only going to be one point, maybe two points. It's a very difficult way to make a living. I personally do not sell above bars when the channel is tight. I'm only looking to buy. However, once the market becomes two sided or if the channel becomes broad, then I would consider selling at prior highs and scaling in higher. Again, if you're scalping for one point in a tight bull channel selling at prior highs, you have to win 90% of the time. Even then, you're barely going to make any money. Most great traders are rarely going to short in a tight bull channel because they know the math is bad. It makes much more sense to do the opposite. Buy breakouts, buy closes, buy bear closes, buy below bars betting reversals will fail. And because of that, an experienced trader is not going to be selling in a very tight bull channel. I always pay attention to whether or not bears can make money. And that's really, really important. If the market's in a bull trend and the bears are having a very difficult time making money, that tells me two things. One, I don't want to be shorting. And two, I can buy for any reason at any time and I'll have a very good chance of making money. I'm always looking at every breakout. Will the market reverse down enough to make money? If a bear sells that high and he scales in higher, can he make money? Is it easy to make money as a bear? And if it's not, then I'm going to be buying every reversal down, betting that the reversals will fail and that the trend will continue up. Here, you can argue we have a breakout and more breakout here, but a big tail. So maybe the market's not all that strongly bullish. Also, the follow through bar is small. So it's not a particularly strong follow through bar. So you can argue that we're getting disappointing follow through from the breakout. The bears believe the market is always in long. We have a breakout. We have more breakout. We have follow through. However, they also look at it and say, oh, that big tail, that small follow through bar, maybe we'll get a pullback that drops far enough down for a scalp. If a bear did short and scale in higher, or if he did not take that short and simply sold at the close of this bar or at the close of that bar, he's going to be looking for a scalp, a one point scalp. Since the bears made money selling this high and scaling in higher, this low fell below the breakout point, some bears will continue to do that. We have a new high here, we have a breakout, some bears will sell that high. But did they make money? Probably not. Then we have a new high here and a bull breakout. Did the bears make money selling this high, scaling in higher? Maybe, but they clearly did not make much and it was not all that easy to do. It's difficult for the bears to make money selling prior highs. Here they sold at that high and the market pulled back just enough for them to exit with a one point profit. Bears sell this high, sell more one point higher. It dropped back below this high and they were able to make one point on that scalp as well. Break even on their first entry at that high and then a one point profit on their second entry. Bears see that they're barely making money on their shorts and as soon as it hits their limit order to buy back their shorts with a profit, it continues up. To me, this is not easy for the bears to make money. When I see a situation like this where the market barely falls far enough for them to make money and they have to scale in to make one point scalp, I think it's not worth shorting. The bear reversal attempts will fail and become bull flags. The bears will decide that the bulls are very strong and therefore the bears will become less willing to sell at prior highs and scale in. They'll wait until they see the market become more two sided, more of a trading range. When the bulls see that it's hard for the bears to make money, they're confident that the market's going higher. They expect at least a couple legs up and maybe some kind of a measured move up and therefore they are more willing to hold on to their trade for a swing up. The market's trying to enter a trading range here. We have a bull breakout with bad follow through. Some bears would sell this high, betting that the breakout will fail before it goes too far up, that this might be the final bull flag. And they might put a stop about five points up, arguing that if they scale in one, two or three times, that's okay. The market still might be good enough for them to make a profit selling. But if they have to scale in five times at one point, two points, three points, four points, five points, then their premise is probably wrong. Therefore they don't want to continue to hold short. Some bears would sell at this high, sell more one point higher, sell more two points higher. Other bears will take that short and not scale in one or two points higher. They'll sell and then they'll look for a bear bar like here and sell more below a bear bar. We have a bear bar here, but the market did not go below its low. Also, had they sold below this low, it would be less than a scalp above their first entry. So most traders would not scale in there. What they're looking for is a bear bar. They sell below its low and they expect the market to come back down to their original entry. They want this entry to be at least two to three times the size of a scalp to make it worthwhile. So if an average scalp in the E-mini is one point, they want this entry, if they're going to take it, to be at least two or three points above their first entry. And then they hold, hoping for the market to come back down to their original entry, where they can get out break even on their first entry, and then with three or four points profit on their third entry, depending on how much above the first entry their second entry is. In general, this is a better approach. Instead of selling the high, selling more higher, selling more higher, wait instead to sell below a bear bar when the channel is tight. When the channel is broad, and you can see that every breakout does not go very far before it reverses, then you might be more willing to scale in one point up, two points up. The market came down exactly to their first entry, exactly to this high, and they were not able to get out. What would I do in that situation? Well, I'd look at the entire structure. We have a high one, a high two, it failed. We have two more legs down, one and two. You can call it a high four type of pattern, a complex bottom type of pattern. We have a high one, high two, try to bottom, it failed. And then two more legs down, one, two, tried to reverse up again. So a complex bottom, or you can simply call it a big high two, leg one, pull back, leg two. And we have a micro double bottom here at the target price for the bears. They want to get out break even on their first entry, which is at that high. And now we're getting a second reversal up, first reversal, second reversal up, with a micro double bottom and a bull body. That's a reasonable buy. If you're a bull, you're going to take that buy. And if you're a bear, had you taken this short and sold more below this bear bar, you'd get out here. You'd have a small profit on your second entry, a small loss on your first entry. Some bears would continue to hold short, arguing that the market is transitioning to a trading range. And if it's a trading range, it probably will fall below support, which would be this low and this breakout point. You can look at it as possibly a trending trading range. We have a trading range, a brief breakout, not all that strong. And then another trading range. When you have that, there's a 60% chance the market will fall at least one tick below the top of the lower range. And the bears know that. And some bears, or at least experienced bears, might be willing to hold, expecting 60% chance will drop below that high, which it did here. However, I would not. To me, this is a reasonable buy. And if I'm selling in a bear trend and I see a reasonable buy, I'm going to get out. A lot of bears, if they sell that high and they sell more higher, and then they see the close of this bar, and then they see a follow through bar also closing on its high, they're going to assume the breakout is strong enough to have at least a second leg up. And they'll just get out with a loss. They sold here, they sold more at one point higher, and they'll get out on the close of this bar. And that's another reason why when you get a breakout with a follow through bar and a bull trend, bulls will buy. They'll buy that close. They'll buy the reversal down. They'll buy above the high of this bar, betting that they'll be at least a second leg up, far enough up for them to make at least a scout. What about reversing? So let's say you sold here, you sold more here, you decide on the close of this bar that it's going higher. Most experts do not like to reverse because they feel they're not objective. They've been looking at the market as a reasonable sell, and now they're looking at it as a reasonable buy. And usually it's just tough emotionally to make the switch. However, the math is pretty good. If you did take that sell and sold more here, and then you reversed along here, you're probably going to get a rally big enough to reverse the losses that you had over here. And that's a common situation whenever you think the market is going to do something and it does the opposite. Usually, if you take a reversal trade, you'll be able to recover your original loss. So if you sold here and you, let's say you bought on that close, usually the market will go up at least that far so that you'll be able to make enough on your long to offset what you lost on your short. Some traders will reverse the long, most will not. They'll exit and then they'll look to buy maybe at the low of this bar, looking for at least a scalp up, a scalp equal to the size of their loss. We have a very tight bull channel and we're getting a pullback. So it's a high one bull flag, a high two bull flag, a high three, so a wedge. And now it's about 10 bars into the bull flag. And at some point you have to decide, maybe it's an endless pullback and it's going to lead to a reversal instead of a resumption in the bull trend. Every bear channel is a bull flag, 75% chance you get a bull breakout. But in a situation like this, where the rally is fairly climactic, climactic, climactic, here, here, here, and then you get an extensive pullback like this, the probability starts to go up that you'll get a bear breakout and a measured move down. Whenever you have a bull flag and it lasts 20 or more bars, here it's not 20 bars, but it might be 10 or 15 bars, you've got to be thinking that it might be the final bull flag and that the breakout, when it comes, will probably not get very far before you get a reversal down. Here we have a breakout. It does not look like we went to a new high. Sometimes you'll get a final flag reversal and the breakout did not even lead to a new high. The breakout failed at a lower high, which is the case here. Failed breakout above the bull flag. Bull breakout, reversal down. Three consecutive bear bars closing on or near their lows. The odds are we're going to get at least a small second leg down, which we did over here at the end of the day. It's fairly common for a bear trend to begin as a bear breakout below a bull flag. We have a bull flag. We tried to get a bull breakout, did not get very far. And then we reversed down, bear breakout below the bull flag. And you'd expect a second leg down because the breakout is reasonably strong. Therefore, bears will sell this close. And we got two or three legs up. We went up here, a little bull bar, and then a bear bar. Up again, two more bull bars, and then a bear bar. And then up a third time. This is a wedge lower high. A double top with this sell climax high. And about a 50% pullback. Even though it has a bull body, it's a reasonable short, expecting a second leg down into the end of the day. Bears, they're selling. They'll sell this high. One point higher, two points higher, three points higher. Sell that high. Sell this high. Sell this bad close. Sell that high. Sell more higher. We have a pullback here, but look at how small the other pullbacks were. They're non-existent here. That means it's really difficult for the bears to make money. And eventually they stop trying. At some point, after trying here, maybe here, the bears stop selling. And if you have a relative absence of bears selling, the odds are the market's going to go higher. The bears want to sell higher. They want to sell after the market begins to enter a trading range. They'll stop selling in a tight bull channel. Here, the bears sell. More one point higher, two points higher, three points higher. And they were lucky to get out break even. That means it's really difficult and very stressful. And the risk reward is terrible. You had a large risk, very little reward, and not great probability. That means it's hard for the bears to make money. The same with all of these other sells as well. And when that's the case, eventually the bears stop selling. Very common for the bulls to get a breakout with a follow-through bar. So we have a decent bull bar. And then the next bar has a bull body. That increases the chances that the bulls will get at least a second leg up. And as I said, if you're taking these shorts here and more higher, it's hard to reverse. Most traders don't do it. And therefore, it's hard to make up the loss that you got from taking the scale in short, selling at this high and selling more higher. Therefore, don't do it. Also, if you do it, just get out and take the loss and don't worry about reversing too long. Because it's so difficult to make money, and because the risk quickly gets bigger than the reward, and you need a very high probability of success, it's very, very difficult to make money. There's no room for mistakes. You have to trade perfectly, or you're going to lose. And it's not easy to do, even for an experienced trader. Therefore, most experienced traders are not shorting when you have a very tight bull channel like this or like this. Tight channel, better only to look to buy. And it's clearly a good trade to buy because the reversals last one bar or very small. And the odds are we're going to go higher. Also, if you're thinking about shorting, you probably will not take any of the buys. You'll just keep looking for shorts, looking for shorts, looking for shorts, and you'll end up missing a bull trend that rallied eight points above the breakout. Whenever you're looking at a market from one perspective, long or short, in this case, if you're looking at it to sell, and it's really hard to do, that's telling you that it's usually better to do the opposite. So if you look at it and say, wow, it's pretty difficult to make money selling. Well, don't sell, only buy. In fact, every time you see something that you think is a sell, do the opposite. Buy exactly where you're selling. I talked a little bit about scaling in to shorts in a very tight bull channel. And I made the very important point that I'm always paying attention to whether or not the bears can make money. If the market's in a bull channel, and it's very difficult for the bears to make money, and they can only make very little money, and they have to scale in, and their reward is much less than their risk, then it tells me that I should only be doing the opposite. Instead of selling, I should only be looking to buy. The channel is too tight to make money as a bear, easy to make money as a bull. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading and tight bull channels. President Gary are asking if they can Challenge people'sиARCH None to use. Oops. South for eightхаres, SEO is under the right greenヤ dude. Ol agrar theetric Guys. No安ins will allow us to rent this juego in the most Prince cuir Yu.