 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of six videos on trading the open. Many traders think of the day as having three parts. They're particularly interested in trading the open the first hour or two because that is usually the easiest time to make money. Also, starting around 11.30 or so, 11 o'clock, the final hour or two is another great opportunity to make money as well. The market often has a trend up or down into the end of the day. The middle session of the day often is sideways and in a trading range and traders tend to be more cautious. Because the open of the day is the single best time of the day to find swing trades, I want to talk about opening reversals. These are setups on the open that often lead to swing trades. For example, we clearly have a swing on the open here and a swing at the end of the day here. We have a swing up here, early trading range here. The middle of this day was a bear channel. Here we have a swing in the open and a swing up at the close. And most of the day, the middle of the day was a trading range. And sometimes the middle of the day is only an hour or two. Usually it's more like two or three hours. A lot of times the market will go one way and then the other way and then back the first way. So here we have a bear trend, trading range, trend resumption. Here we have a bull trend, a bear trend, and then trend resumption up. Most days are not that obvious or at least not that obvious when you're trading them. They become obvious when you print the chart out at the end of the day. But when you're trading at real time, sometimes it's very difficult to understand what's going on. A lot of traders focus on trading in the open of the day, the first hour or two, and the end of the day. And what that leaves is the middle of the day, which is less clearly defined and less often has big swings. Easier to make money in the first or last hour or two every day. Because it's the most common time to have breakouts with follow through. In other words, swing trades. I don't think volume is particularly important. It used to be 20 years ago, 30 years ago, when the E-mini first started 18 years ago, in the early years of the E-mini. But nowadays, at times when you see very small volume, it's irrelevant. Volume is not an indicator of whether or not the market has the ability to trend. I've seen days where the market goes hours in a very tight trading range with very little volume and then breaks out and goes a long way. And sometimes the breakout has big volume. Other times the breakout has very little volume. I don't care what the volume is. I just care about whether or not the market is breaking out. If I see this, I don't care what the volume is. I'm selling. If I see this, I don't care what the volume is. I'm buying. Because the volume is greater in the beginning of the day, and especially right before one o'clock Pacific time, those 10 minutes before one o'clock, the volume is very, very big. It means traders and institutions are trading more intensely. I guess it slightly increases the chances that you'll get a sustained move up or down. But I never look at the volume to decide whether or not it's good enough to trade. I just look at the trends. If there are trends, I'm looking to trade. Traders like this. They like that. A lot of times they don't trade when it's like this. Traders become much more interested when the market is moving and it's more likely to move in the first hour or two and the final hour or two. In the middle of the day, a lot of times the transitions are not all that clear. And a lot of times the market goes sideways in a series of two legged moves. And a lot of them subdivide. So leg one, pull back two. Leg two subdivided into one, pull back two. Leg one, pull back. And then two. Leg two subdivided, one, pull back two. Transitions often not clear. Lots of reversals. Lots of sideways price action. Overlapping bars. A lot of prominent tails. A lot of traders trade less in the middle of the day. They prefer trading when the market is having good swings. And good swings are more common early and late. Because the day often has three parts, there are often two or more transitions. And traders like to trade the transitions because they like to be selling as early as possible on a swing down. More profit potential. And they like to be buying on a swing up. More profit potential. If you're looking for three parts to the day and the day is not clearly unfolding in three parts, it does not matter. You trade what's in front of you. A strong trend day often begins right on the open. Not necessarily. Sometimes it'll begin after an hour or two. But a strong trend day typically early on begins trading in one direction without ever trading much in the opposite direction. Here's a strong bull trend and here's a strong bear trend. Both are right from the open. Therefore, traders want to sell early here and swing if possible. And buy early here and swing if possible. How often do you see days that look like this or that? Not often. Maybe two or three days a month. So about 10% of the time you get very, very strong trend days. Most days are not strongly trending one way or the other. A lot of times you'll get a strong trend for the first couple of hours and then the market goes mostly sideways for the rest of the day. Most days, 90% of the days, the price action will change. Instead of staying in a strong trend up or down, it'll either enter a trading range or it'll begin to trade in the opposite direction. It'll have a reversal. We traded down. We traded up. We traded sideways. We traded down. There are only three things that the market can do. Break out and form a bear trend or a bull trend. It can channel. We have a channel up here. Or it can be in a trading range. Here we have a bear breakout that failed. We have a bull breakout with a second leg up. It became a bull channel. So you either have a breakout down or up or a channel down or up or a trading range. Those are the only three things that the market can do. And you trade each of them differently. 90% of days do not trend relentlessly one way or the other. That means 90% of the days have at least two types of price action. Either a breakout, a channel or a trading range. Traders are constantly looking for a transition from one type to the other. When the market changes from a breakout to a channel or from a channel to a trading range or from a trading range to a breakout. Traders have to change how they're trading. Because that's how they maximize the profit potential. They have to trade what the market is currently doing. Not what it was doing a few bars ago. I mentioned that most days do not clearly have three parts to the day. A lot of times when you print them out at the end of the day, you'll see the three parts. But this is how traders think. They look for a trade on the open. They look for a trade at the end of the day. And then they trade the middle of the day, however it appears to be. A trading range, they'll trade it like a trading range. A trend, they'll trade it like a trend. Most days are not strong trends. Most change their character. And they have some combination of breakout, channel, and trading range. When there are three parts to the day, they do not divide evenly. 81 bars in the day, it's not as if a third of them, 27 of them, are the first part. And 27 more of the middle part. And 27 more of the third part. Sometimes one or more of the three parts can be very small. Sometimes one or more can be very big. For example, here, the middle third of the day is not the middle third in terms of the number of bars. We're in a trading range, and then it transitioned into a bear channel, and then a bull breakout, mostly a breakout, a very tight bull channel. And the second of the three types of trading lasted a lot longer than the first or third. I'm always paying attention to whether or not I think the market's in a breakout, a channel, or a trading range, because I trade the three of them differently. And it's good to recognize each of the three as early as possible. Some days have only one type of trading. If there's only going to be one type, it's most commonly a trading range. You'll virtually never see a breakout that lasts all day. It'll usually transition at least to a tight channel. Channels can last all day, broad channels or tight channels. But trading range days commonly last all day. Some days have lots of transitions. Instead of just three parts, they can have five parts, six parts. For example, trading range, tight channel, bull channel, bear channel, bear channel here, bull channel here, breakout here. You simply trade what's in front of you. It's very often that the past few bars look one way like a breakout. And once you see more bars, you discover that they're part of something bigger like a trading range or a channel. We have a very tight bear channel, but it became a leg and a trading range. We have a very tight trading range within a bigger trading range and within a broad bear channel. Strong bear breakout, very deep pullback. It's a trading range and it's a broad bear channel. Is the open just the first bar? Is it the first hour? Is it the first two hours? It differs on every day. You're looking for the time before there is a swing. That is the opening range. And some days there is no opening range. It just simply rallies on the open. You can call this whole thing the opening range, but I would call this more a trend from the open bull trend. To me, this is not an opening range type day. It's a trend from the open bull trend and a parabolic wedge that reversed and formed an early high of the day. Here, the opening range may have been right here. Maybe you'll say it's the first 10 or 15 bars right here. Here, a limit order open, a trading range open for a couple of hours. The bulls bought the reversal up. They sold the reversal down. Here, on the open, the market simply went sideways for several hours. Traders looked to trade reversals, buying failed breakouts below the bottom, buying higher lows, selling double tops and reversals down. Here, we have a gap up and a double bottom, this low and this low. The bulls got a small rally, but it did not last long. But to me, this would be the opening range on this day. Is the opening range just this first cluster of bars or is it all the way down here? I would call this the opening range and this a swing down from the opening range, but it does not matter. Same with all of these. No opening range, small opening range. Here's the first trade of the day. Once the first swing up or down ends, then traders conclude that that first third of the day has ended. Here we have an opening range, a trading range, and it continued all day. This is the opening range, and then the day became a trading range day. On a day like this, you're not really clear when the open actually ended. Did it end here? Did it end here? I don't think it matters because the market's in an early trading range and it continued in a trading range. And traders would keep trading it as if it's in the trading range until there's a clear and strong breakout one way or the other. Most days have at least a small early trading range before there's a swing up or down. This is unusual. Maybe 20% of the days the first bar is the low or high of the day. A trend from the open bull trend. Next, I want to talk about opening reversals. In the first hour or two, sometimes in the very first minute of the day, the market begins a swing trade. And there are setups that often tell traders that a swing trade is about to begin. This is a very important slide. It's a problem for traders starting out. They'll see a very strong breakout like this and they'll conclude that the day has to be a bear trend. Or they'll see a very strong rally on the open and they'll conclude that the day is probably going to be a bull trend. And that is wrong. On the open, no matter how strong a sell-off, no matter how strong a rally, 50% chance it's going to fail and reverse. And that takes a while to get used to, but that is the truth. 50% of strong moves on the open reverse. So don't get fooled. If you see a strong sell-off like this and then you get a bull bar closing over its midpoint or on its high, it's often an inside bar or a big reversal bar. If you're short, it's better to get out of shorts. If you want, you can often get long. And the opposite is true here. If you see a strong rally on the open within a few bars, you get a bear bar closing on or near its low. It's reasonable to get out of your long. And then if you get another buy setup, you can buy again. Here are high two bull flag. High one, high two. Some traders will short, taking a chance that it will remain the high of the day. So they'll sell below that bear bar, put a stop above, and then just wait. And you can see the market tried to go up. It could not run the stops of the bears and it reversed down. Opening up and then a reversal down. Opening reversal. Strong sell-off and the market's always in short, yet it reversed up. It's an opening reversal up. I would call this an opening reversal up from the 60-minute moving average. Even though it fell several points below the 60-minute moving average, a lot of times that's what happens when you get a test of the 60-minute moving average. Sometimes the market will fall five or even ten points below and then reverse up strongly. If you want, you can also call this a second failed breakout below yesterday's low. We don't see yesterday's low, but this is a gap down below yesterday's low. We tried to reverse up. An even stronger breakout below yesterday's low and it reversed up. This is an opening reversal up and this is a second opening reversal up. This is an opening reversal down, a reasonably strong rally to resistance. The moving average and a bear trend and about a 50% pullback from yesterday's close to today's opening low. Opening reversal up and it became the low of the day. Strong rally on the open above the moving average. However, it became the high of the day. Bare bar right after the rally. It went sideways for a lot of bars and the bulls tried to resume, but it remained the high of the day. And the reversal took place here. Big up, big down. Not quite as big as the up, but big enough down to make traders think that this might be a double top. We might break below the neckline and fall for at least a measured move. Opening reversal down. Opening reversal. It's an early reversal at support or resistance. If you get a strong sell off down to support and the market reverses up, it often is the low of the day. Like this, this, and this. If you get a strong rally on the open and it reverses down, that reversal down is an opening reversal down. The opening reversal often is some other pattern as well, like a wedge rally here. Micro double top here. Sometimes it's a final flag or a lower low major trend reversal. Here a double bottom, slightly lower low double bottom from yesterday. Here we have a double bottom bull flag. The market's rallying. We rally, we pull back sharply. The bears trying to get a reversal. Instead, the bulls get a double bottom at the moving average and the market reverses up. You can see the moving average. We gapped down from yesterday's close, maybe below yesterday's low. And we reversed up strongly again and again a third time. Yet, the market reversed down at the moving average. Three reversals up. Each failed. It's a wedge bear flag. Bear flag because we're below the moving average and below yesterday's close. And then it became a double top as well. But at this point, it's an opening reversal down, possible high of the day. Bears will sell and put a stop above the top of the wedge. This tested the stop but never hit it. We broke strongly above yesterday's high and stalled. We got a micro double top and a reversal down, an opening reversal down from the resistance at yesterday's high. This is last week's low. And this is a strong sell off trying to break below last week's low. Last week was a sell signal bar and the bears were hoping to get a weekly sell signal. Instead, we had a very strong sell off and then a very good bull bar closing on its high. The bulls were buying, betting that the market would not trigger the weekly sell signal. And the bears were buying back their shorts once they saw this good looking bull bar. We broke strongly below yesterday's low, yet we reversed up an opening reversal up from below yesterday's low. The market's in a bull trend and we tried to rally on the open. And then we reversed down strongly. The bears were hoping this would be the high of the day. Instead, we reversed up strongly. And this is a double bottom at the moving average in a bull trend. So a double bottom bull flag opening reversal up after a sell off down to the moving average. When the market has an opening reversal, the size of the initial wrong move is significant. It determines what will happen next. For example, here we have a sell off that is about 25 to 50% of the size of the prior days range. I don't see the full size of the prior days range, but it's not a particularly big sell off. And when you get a reversal from a sell off that is not particularly big, the day often can go and become a very big bull trend. So a sell off reversal above the high and you can get a very big bull trend out of it. And you can see it went up for about a measured move up based upon the initial sell off, maybe a little bit more. The rally after the reversal went far above the open. Now that's very different from an initial sell off that is between 50 and 100% of an average days range. This sell off is about the size of an average days range, even though the sell off was only in four bars. Whenever the initial sell off is big and then you get a reversal, it doesn't matter if it's a reversal in the open or if the reversal occurs later in the day. The reversal usually leads to a trading range rather than a big bull trend. Sometimes the market gets above the high as it did here, but when it does, it usually does not get much above the high. A lot of times it'll get near the high, not quite above it, and then simply go sideways. A big initial sell off if you get a reversal usually results in a doji bar on the daily chart. A down move and an up move, but not a big trend above the high. It can rally all day. Here it rallied for about 70 bars, but only barely got above the open. It simply retraced the four bar sell off. It took 70 bars to retrace those four bars, but that's all it did was retrace the four bars. Initial sell off, very big, about the size of an average days range in just four bars. When you get a reversal, the reversal usually has a hard time going much above the high. If it does go above the high at all. This is true for all reversals. These charts are examples of opening reversals. An early sell off and a reversal up. Early sell off and a reversal up. But it would not matter if the sell off lasted until the middle of the day, and then you get the reversal in the middle of the day. The same thing. If the sell off is very big, the reversal often will retrace the entire sell off, but not go for a measured move up. It usually has a hard time going much above the top of the bare leg. That was a bull reversal, and now I have bear reversals illustrating the same point. Here, the rally is very small. Probably less than 25% of an average days range. Once you get a reversal, the reversal can lead to a very big trend day. Very small rally, maybe 25% of an average days range. When you get a reversal, the reversal can be much bigger than the initial rally. And here, it's many times bigger. Not simply a measured move down. It's maybe three, four, five times the height of the initial rally. This is a very big rally on the open. About the size of an average days range, and it occurred simply in the first 15, 20 bars or so. Whenever you have a very big rally on the open, and you get a reversal, usually the market has a hard time falling much below the low of the day. Rarely, I say rarely, maybe 20% of the time, it goes very far down and falls for a measured move or more. And that was the case here. A very big rally, and then we get a reversal. Usually, the reversal will have a hard time falling much below the low of the rally. Sometimes, maybe one chance out of five, it'll fall for a lot further and go down for about a measured move, as it did here. And this is true whether or not the reversal occurs on the open, or whether it occurs later in the day. This is on the open. This is a little bit later in the day, but it would not matter if the reversal topped out here and came down. The same logic holds. If the initial rally is very big, the sell-off, it can last for the remainder of the day, but usually does not go far below the bottom of the bull trend. This is the exception where it does go very far below the bull trend. At any given bar on the day, what's the chance that you've already seen the high or low of the day? This is the E-mini chart. It has 81 bars in the day session on a five-minute chart. At the close of the first bar, there's a 20% chance that the first bar will remain the low of the day, and a 20% chance that it is the high of the day. At this point, by the time the bar closes, you don't know which it will be, but there's a 20% chance it will be the low and will go up, or the high and will go down. By the end of the seventh bar, there's a 50% chance that the market has either already made the high or already has made the low. By the end of the 12th bar, the end of the first hour, there's a 70% chance that either this will remain the low or this will remain the high. Bar 18, hour and a half into the day. You can test this yourself, what I'm about to say, but it's true. By the close of bar 18, there's a 90% chance we've seen either the low or the high of the day. There's nothing magical about 18. I could have picked bar 15, and by bar 15, instead of 90%, maybe there's a 80%. I could have picked bar 30, and by 30, maybe 95% chance that we've seen the high or low of the day. I use bar 18, and it's a pretty reliable marker for the high or low of the day, 90% chance. And that's important because if you break below the low, then you know the market's not going above the high, 90% certain, and therefore the day is either a bear trend or a trading range day. If, on the other hand, it breaks above the high of the 18 bar range, the first 18 bars, then the day is probably going to be a bull trend day or a trading range day, and it's probably not going down to a new low. Here's bar 80. The five-minute chart has 81 bars. What's the chance that by the close of bar 80, we've seen the high or low of the day? 99.9% chance by the close of this bar, either this will remain the high or this will remain the low. Is that useful information? Of course not, because you're not going to be placing a trade based on that information for the last bar of the day. Traders are always looking for a swing trade early in the day. Early in the day, there's a 90% chance that you're going to have a profitable swing trade up or down. By the close of the first bar, you have a 20% chance that you've already seen the high or low of the day, or at least the high or low of the next several hours. First bar of the day here, even though we sold off for five hours, it remained the low of the day for the first six hours. First bar here, despite this reversal up, it remained the high of the day for the remainder of the day. First bar here, a bear reversal bar, it remained the high for the next 40 bars. This video, I'm going to focus on finding a swing trade on the open. By the open, I don't necessarily mean the first bar, I mean the opening range. Sometimes there is no opening range. Sometimes the market just rallies immediately from the first bar. More often, it goes sideways for an hour or two. That hour or two is the open. Traders will look for a swing trade during that opening range. I'm going to be talking about swing trading here. If you want to find out information about scalping, you can look at the videos on scalping. There's often a report that comes out at 7 o'clock Pacific time and that's bar 7. By the close of that seventh bar of the day, there's a 50% chance we've seen either the high or low of the day, or it's certainly the high or low for the next several hours. Bar 7, it became the high of the day. The first 90 minutes, there's a 90% chance that the high or low of the day has already formed. I'll talk more about this in a later video on trading the open. Here's the high of the day. High of the day. High of the day. High of the day. This is by the 18th bar, all of these. When I talk about swing trading in the E-mini, typically I'm talking about a profit of 4 points or more. There's a 90% chance of a swing trade, a 4 point profit, beginning in the first 2 hours. We have a swing up, a couple swings down here, several swings down, all beginning within the first couple of hours. There's an 80% chance of a swing trade beginning in the last 2 hours as well. Everyone should be looking for swing trades of 4 points or more. It's the easiest way to get consistently profitable. There's a 50% chance that you'll get a swing trade beginning in the middle of the day. So here we had a quiet trading range day, and the second half of the day became a trading range. It's very common to find swing trades in the middle of the day that began in the first 2 hours. Middle of the day, we have a swing trade that began in the first 2 hours. Because the market is either going to have a swing trade starting in the first 2 hours or shortly afterwards, traders should work very hard to look for swing trade setups in the first 2 hours, and in the last couple of hours of the day as well. You can see in this sample of charts, there were swing trades that went into the end of the day on every chart. I have had friends who only traded the first hour or two. I had one friend who only would trade the first hour every day. He was trading 100 T-Bond futures contracts. He told me, Al, I looked at my results, and 85% of my profits came from the first hour. Therefore, I'm only going to trade the first hour. Other traders trade only the beginning of the day and the end of the day, with very little trading in the middle of the day because the middle of the day often is quiet. I had another friend who used to trade the first 2 hours and then go out on errands for the middle 2 hours and then come back and trade the final 2 hours. He was a very successful and consistently profitable trader. In fact, he and I traded together for years. To be honest, I don't remember a day when he lost money. Trading range is more likely going to consolidate the move of the first hour. It often has tight trading ranges and lots of minor reversals. Traders often end up entering with limit orders during that middle third of the day. Beginners should not be entering with limit orders and therefore, when the middle of the day looks like this or like this, usually most traders should not be trading like that, like this, or like that. Traders tend to think of the day as having 3 parts. They pay particular attention to what takes place in the first couple of hours because that is the time of the day when they have the best opportunity for a swing trade. Also, they focus again intensely in the final hour or two because there is often a swing trade at the end of the day. The middle of the day often has swing trades as well, but traders tend to be more cautious and the market is more likely to be in a trading range. Because the open is so important, there are a number of setups that take place, especially opening reversals, and I discussed several of them today. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of six videos on trading the open. the opening opens up Meners during the Starts само nadial przednay Thank you.