 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos on orders. When you're deciding what to do with your orders, the price action should determine what order you should place and where you should place it. I want to talk a little bit about limit orders, trading with the trend, and trading against the trend. Also, traders can sometimes enter earlier on a smaller timeframe chart, reducing their risk. When the market has big swings, consecutive trend bars, not much in terms of tails, not much in terms of reversals, traders can enter with stops or limit orders. Strong bear trend. You can enter with stops below bars. You can sell at the market. You can sell with limit orders above bars. Betting reversals will fail. Strong bull trend. You can buy with stops above bars. You can buy with stops above bars here. You can buy with limit orders below bars. Betting that reversals will fail. However, when there are lots of reversals, every few bars, the market goes the opposite way. Every bull bar followed by a bad follow-through bar. A series of bear bars with bad follow-through. And the market is mostly horizontal. And many bars have prominent tails. You can see almost all bars have fairly prominent tails. This is a bad environment for stop entries. Most traders should not trade when the market is starting to look like this. However, experienced traders will enter with limit orders. Selling above bars, buying below bars, and scaling in lower, and scalping. This is a bad environment for stop orders. A stop order is a bet that a trend will continue. When the market looks like this, stop orders are going to lose money. Because the trends keep reversing. It's more of a limit order market. Betting that breakouts will fail. Selling above bars, betting on a reversal down. Buying below bars, betting on a reversal up. When the market is very tight in a range like this, most traders should not trade. They should simply wait. Experienced traders will trade with limit orders and they'll scalp. Sometimes when you look at a chart, you're not sure if it is early in a trading range or if it's in a weak trend. When you're in doubt about what to do, you have three choices. One is you can wait for a second or third signal with a good signal bar. Another is you can wait for a strong breakout. Then you have high probability, but your stop is further away. And third, you can simply wait for a clear signal. For example, do you buy here betting on a double bottom? Do you buy here a second entry buy? This is an example of a second entry buy. Three bear bars, a bear trend, low probability buy. But now we have a second reversal, a second attempt at bottom. You can call it a final flag reversal, a lower low. We have lots of doji bars, bars with prominent tails and the market's going sideways. It's probably an early trading range. Here you're buying a second entry at the bottom of the range. This is a higher probability buy. Tight trading range. If you're looking to sell, here's a first entry short. The market fell below this bear bar right here. It fell below this bear bar here, so that's the second entry. And here's a third attempt. Whenever you have three reversals in a horizontal trading range, you can call it a triangle if you want. You can also call it a third entry short. The third entry has a higher probability of success. We're getting a breakout. The first reversal down when this bar fell below that bar. Not a high probability short because we have five consecutive bull bars. We have a lot of trading range price action here. Most breakouts above trading ranges fail. It's higher probability to take a second entry short. The first entry was this bar falling below that bar. Traders would then place a stop order to go short below this bar, which would be a second entry short. The market's in a fairly tight bear channel. Traders will sell below pullback bars. For example, we have a pause bar here and attempt to reverse. This is a strong enough breakout. We'll probably get at least a little bit more down. Traders would therefore try to sell below the low of this bar. These two bars have the same low. The trader would get filled on this bar, betting that there would be at least enough trend resumption down for a profitable trade. Even though after the breakout there's a bull bar, bad follow through, the bar afterwards had a bear bar. Sometimes the follow through occurs on the second bar, not the bar after the bear trend bar. When the channel is tight like this, the odds of a reversal up going very far are small. Most likely any reversal up is going to be a bear flag or possibly a bull leg in what would become a trading range. If we went up five or ten bars, we probably would come back down and test this area. So a trader selling here could sell more on a rally, expecting the market to come back down here. A tight bear channel is unlikely to become a bull trend. The best the bulls usually can get is only a trading range. If you sell here, you can sell more higher trading range. You expect it to come back down. Very tight bear channel, strong breakout, probably at least a small second leg down. This is the second leg down. Would you buy above this bull bar? Well, I don't know. We've got two consecutive bear bars. Now you have a micro double bottom and a lower low. Basically a double bottom, this low and that low. And this is a micro double bottom. Micro double bottom is a type of second entry buy. And therefore it's reasonable to buy here, betting on at least a minor reversal, possibly a major reversal. Probably not enough bars for a major reversal. Probably good enough for a profit above a lower low. If you buy above this bull bar, you have two consecutive bear bars. You're gonna sell more for a profitable minor reversal up and a profitable buy. Traders can use limit orders when they're trading in the direction of the trend, betting on reversals failing. And they can also use limit orders betting on a reversal in a trend. We have a bear trend here, a bull trend here, here, trends are always trying to reverse. When the market's in a reasonably strong trend, during a breakout, there's a breakout here, traders will bet that reversal attempts will fail. For example, they'll buy with a limit order at the low of this bar, betting that there'll be at least a small second leg up. When the market is starting to look like a trading range, traders will bet that breakout attempts will fail. For example, they might sell above the high of this bar, betting that the first reversal up from a tight bear channel is likely a bull leg in a trading range. So they'll sell at that high, betting that the reversal up will fail. Likewise, down here, we're starting to get a lot of doji bars, trading range types of bars. Traders would look to buy below the low, the prior low, betting that the reversal will fail and that the market will stop being in a bear trend and start entering a trading range. We have five bear bars after a wedge top. A second leg down is likely. Wedge top, one, two, three. Five bars down. Two of them are dojis, but three are pretty good bear bars closing in their lows. The market will likely have a second leg down. This is a bear trend. Traders will bet the reversal up will fail. They'll place a limit order to sell above the high of this bar or above the high of this bear bar. They'll get filled here. And then they'll look to take a profit somewhere down here. We have reversal up, a second reversal up, and a third reversal up. This is a wedge bottom. After a fairly weak trend, not much in terms of consecutive bear bars. We have a bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, doji, three bull bars. Bear bar, bear bar with tail, dojis, bull bars. This is a weak sell-off. Probably a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Traders will look for reasons to buy a reversal up. We have a wedge bottom, and we have a strong bull breakup bar and a bull follow-through bar. Strong enough so that the market will probably have at least a small second leg up. Bears will see this as a double top. Bulls will correctly decide that it's more likely there'll be buyers below this bull bar. We have a bull breakup bar, a big bull bar. We have a follow-through bull body, even though it's small. We have a wedge bottom. We have a lot of trading range price action. Bulls will place a limit order to buy at the low of this bar. They'll get filled here. They'll put their stop down here, betting on at least a small second leg up. They're using a limit order to trade in the direction of a bull trend. Just like the bears who sold here, we're using a limit order to trade in the direction of a bear trend. Traders will also use limit orders to bet that a trend will fail. They'll be trading counter trend. Traders see a reversal down, reversal down, and then a big doji bar at the top of a wedge channel. Some traders will bet that the breakout above the channel will fail, and they'll place a limit order to sell at the high of this bar, or at the high of this bar. If they sold at the high of this bar, their order would not be filled. But if they placed a limit order to sell at the high of this bar, they'd be filled right here, betting on at least a couple legs down from the wedge. This is betting against a trend. This is using a limit order, betting that a trend is about to reverse. We have a bear sell-off, but we're getting bad follow-through. Dojis, prominent tails, sideways bars. The bulls who bought at this low had a bounce, maybe enough for a scalp. The bulls who bought at this low, again, probably made it up for a scalp. Therefore, bulls are assuming the market might be entering a trading range, and they'll look to buy prior lows, and sometimes they'll even look to buy below a bear flag. Here we have a double-top bear flag, and we have a good bull bar here, a better bull bar here. Some bulls will place a limit order to buy at the low of this bar, just in case the market does not fall below this low. They'll place a limit order, they'll get filled here. It does not matter that it fell a little further. Some bulls would even buy more at this low, betting that we're entering a trading range, and we'll probably get a bounce that's at least big enough for a profitable scalp. Again, bear trend, but bulls buying either at the prior low or below a low 2 bear flag. We have a double top, therefore it's a low 2, low 1, low 2. They'll place a limit order to buy at that low for a scalp up, betting that the bear trend will evolve into a trading range, and they'll be able to make a profitable scalp. We have a strong rally, but it's about a 50% correction. And we have a pullback, three consecutive bear bars. The bulls are trying to resume, but bad follow-through. Another bull bar, bad follow-through. Some bears will sell with a limit order at the top of this bear bar, betting that there's not enough momentum up for the market to go much higher, and therefore this might be the start of a trading range rather than the start of a bull trend. They'll sell with a limit order at the top of this bear bar, betting that maybe it's a low 2 short. We have one leg up, reversal, second leg up. Trying to get a third leg up, they'll bet against a successful bull breakout, and instead a trading range. We have an early bull trend. We have a breakout, a bull flag, a weak breakout of the bull flag, bear bar, bear bar. Traders will place a limit order to go short at the high of this bear bar, and they'll get filled here, betting that the bull trend will fail. They're using a limit order to bet against a bull trend, and instead bet on a trading range. The market is starting to rally. We have a series of consecutive bull bars, but we have a lot of bear bars here, and this high is a double top with this high. This high is also a double top with this high. It looks like the market's evolving into a trading range. Here's a high one buy, but a bear bar, and the market did not go up very far. Now we have a high two buy, but a bear doji, probably not going to be a very profitable buy. Some bears will sell at the high of this bar, betting against a successful bull breakout, and instead betting the bull breakout will fail, and that this will become a trading range. They're betting against a successful breakout and continuation of this bull trend. They're trading counter trend with a limit order, selling at the top of a rally. When the market looks like it might be entering a trading range, very tight bear channel, first reversal up, probably minor, a bull leg in a trading range. Traders will sell at prior highs. Here's a prior high. Traders will place a limit order to sell. They'll get filled here. They'll put a stop above this bear trend high. And the same thing here. We have a major high. It led to a new low. Bears will sell with a limit order at the high of this bar, and they'll get filled here. And even here, they'll sell with a limit order at the high of this bar. We have another high here. The market's going above it. They'll sell here. Different choices all close together, but all our adequate choices stop above the top of the bear trend, betting that this rally is not strong enough to be the start of a bull trend. Instead, it's probably two legs up in a trading range, one pullback, two, and that if it's a leg up in a trading range, it'll be followed by a leg down. And the bears, therefore, are betting against a successful trend, betting in favor of a trading range, selling at and above prior highs. We have a bull flag, four consecutive bull bars, but a bear bar at a prior high and around a 50% pullback. That's not a very good-looking bull flag. Bears will place a limit order to sell at the high of this buy signal bar, a bear bar, and a possible double top. The same true here. We're getting a bull breakout, but again, a bear bar. This bar has a prominent tail on top as it's breaking above this prior lower high. It's a lower high compared to the top of the bear trend. Traders expect this is a bad buy signal bar, a bad bull flag. They'll place a limit order to sell at the high of this bar, and they'll get filled right there. The same is true at the bottom of what they think is a trading range. A double top bear flag, but bad follow-through, a lot of prominent tails, a lot of trading range price action. The entire sell-off looks like a bear leg in a trading range. Traders will begin to buy at the low bars, betting that bear breakouts will fail. They place a limit order to buy at the low of this bar, and they get filled right here. Here we're getting a bull reversal, fairly low down in a possible big trading range. Bulls will bet that this double top bear flag will fail. This breakout is strong enough for a second leg up. They'll place a limit order to buy at the low of this bar. The bears see a double top bear flag and a bear trend. The bulls see a wedge bottom, one, two, three, and a strong reversal up. Probably will get a second leg up. Bulls will place a limit order to buy at the low of this bar, and their order will get filled right here, and their stop will be here. A lot of trading range price action. Does not look like a strong rally. It lacks consecutive big bull trend bars. Does not look like a strong sell-off. It lacks consecutive big bear bars. Two big bear bars here, but a doji here. Bear bar here, but a doji here. A couple bear bars here, but a tail. Traders will look to buy at a prior low, looking for a scalp up. And trading range price action, they'll sell at a prior high, betting on a reversal down. So they buy this low. They place a limit order as the market is falling. They place a limit order to buy this low. As the market's falling again over here, they'll place a limit order to buy this low, each time expecting the breakout to not fall very far and to bounce enough for them to get a scalp. A lot of times, they'll buy this low. They'll get filled here, and they'll try to buy more down here, as long as their second entry is at least as big as a scalp. If they buy here, and they buy more here, if it's the size of a scalp, and the market reverses back up to their first entry price, they get out-break-even on their first entry, and with a scalp profit on their lower entry. We have a reversal down, a second reversal down. A lot of traders will assume the bull bars are not big enough and powerful enough to lead to a bull trend. We have a tail here. We have three bear bars here. They'll bet that the breakout attempt above the top of this bull channel is likely to fail and lead to a wedge. They'll place a limit order to sell at that top of the channel, looking for at least a scalp down, maybe a couple legs down. Here we have what looks like a trading range. We have a series of bull bars here, but fairly prominent tails below and a little bit above. Some traders will place a limit order to sell at a measured move up. Certainly the bulls who bought, if they held, this is a good location to take profits, near the top of the range, above this bar, betting that the market will fail in its breakout attempt. And then you also have a measured move up. We have a breakout, a pullback, and a gap. A little bit of a negative gap. We fell below that low, but still a potential measured move up. Some traders will place a limit order to sell at that high, either to take profits on their longs or to sell at least for a scalp. Wedge bottom, three pushes down. One, two, and now three. A lot of trading range price action. This is probably a bare leg in what will become a trading range. Traders will therefore place a limit order at the bottom of this channel, and they'd get filled right here, betting on a couple legs up. That's also a leg one, leg two, measured move. Leg one, pullback. Leg two, this is the size of this first leg. Traders expect to see some buying at that price. That's an additional reason to buy. Leg two, this is the size of this. That's a big bull. That's a big bull. That's a big bull. That's a big bull. That's a big bull. That's a big bull. That's a big bull. Fairly weak bull channel here and here. Traders will bet that the breakouts will fail to go far enough up for a scalp, and therefore they'll sell at the high of the prior bar, especially if the prior bar is a bear bar. We have two legs up, possibly a wedge, and now we have a big doji and a bull bar at the top of the channel. A lot of bears will sell with a limit order at the high of this bar or the high of that bar, betting that the bull breakout above the top of the channel will fail. Different ways to draw a wedge here. First push up, second push up, third push, or first push, second push, third push, four push. Traders will look to sell above bear bars, betting that they're bad buy signal bars at the top of a trading range or at the top of a weak rally. Also, they'll sell at prior highs. A good-looking bull bar, possible double bottom, down here, down here, but a lot of trading range price action. Weak rally, bad follow through here, bad follow through here. Bull bar, bad follow through here, big tails here. Traders will look to sell above bars, betting that they'll be able to make a profitable scalp and that this rally is not a bull trend. It's a bull leg in what will become a trading range. We have a bear channel, bad follow through, bear bars, bad follow through, bear bar, bad follow through. It looks like a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Traders will therefore look to buy with limit orders, bear breakout attempts below the bottom of the channel. Bear channel, bulls will place the limit order to buy there. We have a bad-looking bear flag, a big tail here. We're trying to break out here. This looks like a bear leg in a trading range. Probably buyers at this low or not far below. We have a bull bar here. It's a bear flag, but a bull bar. Traders will buy either at the low of this bar or at this prior low. And the same is true here. We have a bull bar and a doji bar, not strong sell signal bars. Bulls will buy either at that low or at the prior low. And the same true here. We're getting a lot of dojis. A new low here is possibly a wedge. Three pushes down, one, two, three. Bulls will buy the new low, betting on a wedge and at least a small reversal. I want to talk a little bit about entering on a smaller timeframe. If the context is good, you can often enter earlier, which means your risk is smaller. This is a five minute chart and we have a very strong bull breakout. When you see a bull bar, a second big bull bar, traders need to get long. However, if they're buying here or here on the close, their stop is way down here. And it can be scary to be buying the close or buying at the market. And you don't have enough time to think. What I typically do is I try to buy at the market as the market is rallying strongly like this, betting that the momentum up is so strong, we should get at least enough follow through buying for a profitable trade. Let's say you buy that close. Your stop is below the low of this bar. This line is just a little bit below the low of the bull breakout. 60% chance you're going to get a measured move up from your stop to the entry bar before the market falls down here. So 60% chance it's going to go up here before it goes down here. It's scary to take the buy, but the math is good. An alternative is to wait for a pullback and buy over here. Some traders simply just are unable emotionally to take the buy, buy the market or buy the close. An alternative is to take a look at a smaller timeframe chart. This is a five minute chart. You can look at a one minute chart. And this is the same chart, but a one minute chart. Instead of buying that close, you might look at this and say, well, it's a pretty strong breakout. Maybe I'll buy the close on the one minute chart. Or we have a bear bar, a small pullback. Maybe I'll buy on a stop above the high of that bear bar. Betting on us to follow through buying. As soon as I see three, four or five consecutive bull bars, especially with two or three of them closing on or near their highs, and with the bodies getting pretty big, the odds are we're going to go at least a little bit higher. And therefore I can buy for any reason. I'm going to go to the bottom of the bull bars. And I'm going to go to the bottom of the bull bars. And I'm going to go to the bottom of the bull bars. I can bet that the reversal down will fail. I can buy with a limit order at the low of this bar. Or I can bet the breakout will fail and buy above the high of this bar, or buy above the high of this bar, or buy above the high of this bar. The risk probably is to the bottom of this bull breakout. Realistically, most traders would put their stop down here. However, the risk is less than it is over here on the bottom. The risk is less than it is over here on the five minute chart. Again, you can enter early. We have a bear trend, strong bear breakout. Big, big bear bar. A lot of traders are very uncomfortable selling the close or selling the close of the bear follow through bar. It happens very quickly. Not enough time to think about how to sell. You can sell the close of the breakout bar. We have a bear bar for follow through bar. You can sell the close there. You can bet the reversal up will fail and place a limit order to sell the high of this bar and get filled here. If you don't feel comfortable selling the close or selling above the bull bar or waiting for a pullback, you can take a look at a one minute chart and sometimes you'll get an earlier entry. This is difficult to do if you're a beginner, but experienced traders can do this. Here's the same chart, but a one minute chart. This is exactly this chart, but this is the five minute chart. This is the one minute chart. This is the one minute chart. Two big bear bars closing on their lows. Some traders will sell at the market here, which would be right here on the five minute chart. As soon as you get two very big bars or three or four reasonably big bear bars, traders will look to sell any timeframe. On the one minute chart, you get in a little bit earlier than you would on the five minute chart. You can place a limit order at the high of the prior bar, betting that the reversal up will fail. Or you can place a stop order below this pullback, betting that this is a bear flag and will go lower. You place a stop order below that bar, you get filled here. The price action determines what kind of order you should use. Beginners and most traders should only enter with stops. They can exit with limit orders to take profits. And they always should have a protective stop. Experienced traders will use limit orders either to trade in the direction of a trend, betting reversals will fail. Or they'll use counter trend orders, limit orders, betting that the trend is actually a leg in a trading range and it will soon reverse. Sometimes when you have a big breakout, it's scary and difficult to enter at the market or on the timeframe that you're looking at. An alternative is to switch to a smaller timeframe chart and look for an entry on that smaller timeframe chart. I'm Al Brooks. This is the third of three videos on orders. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course.