 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of three videos on always in trading. Every market is always in a trend or a trading range. And if there is a trend, there's an always in direction. If you had to be in the market at any one moment, it's better to be in the direction of the trend. I'm also going to talk a little bit about the trader's equation, the mathematical basis for taking and managing trades. Now on any timeframe, on any chart, any market, the market is either in a trend or in a trading range. After the market has been in a trend, it then enters a trading range. After it's been in a trading range, it then enters a trend and the trend can be up or down. Remember, markets have inertia and they tend to continue what they've been doing. And that's the basis of trading. 80% of reversals fail. For example, here, here. And 80% of breakout attempts and trading ranges fail. So therefore, 80% of the bars on the chart continue to do what the market has been doing. Just look to the left to get an idea of what the bars off the screen on the right will look like. In a trend, the market's constantly trying to reverse. And 80% of the reversals will fail. So you should only trade in the direction of the trend. If you had to be in the market this entire time, in other words, if you were always in the market, it's an easy choice. You should only be short. And you can enter at any time. You could sell at the market. You could sell pullbacks. You could sell bear closes. You could sell bull closes. But if you're an always in trader, you have to be in the market. And you have two choices, long or short. And the market's clearly in a tight bear channel. It's a strong bear trend. You should only be short. Now look at this. We have trends up. We have trends down. This is a trading range. And 80% of attempts to break into a trend fail. You have to be trading in the opposite direction of an attempted trend. So if you always have to be in the market, you want to be buying near the bottom and selling near the top. And you just reverse multiple times. Sometimes when a trading range is forming, you're not sure that it's a trading range. Here we went down, but then we went up. And then we went down again. So the market's confusing. And that's one of the hallmarks of a trading range. If you look at a chart and you're confused as to what the market is doing, you should assume it's in the early stages of a trading range. On the other hand, if the market just keeps going up and up and up and up and you start waiting for a pullback, you're probably in a trend. For example, here we have an eight bar bull micro channel. Every bar has a low at or above the low of the prior bar. So it's a micro channel, no pullbacks. And if you're watching this and you're thinking, oh my gosh, I want to buy. I want to buy. I want to buy, but I want to pull back. So if you're thinking that you want to buy, but you want to pull back, then you know the market's in a trend. And therefore, if you're always in trader, you have to always be in the market. You just buy. And anytime, even buying right here, because chances are the first reversal down will be minor. You can buy more expecting the market to come back up here. You get up break even on your first entry and with a profit on your second. So you have to buy, at least small. Because, chances are, even if you buy this tick, the market's still going to go higher. And you can buy at the market. A lot of traders want to buy pullbacks, but when there are no pullbacks, and you're waiting for a pullback, you're missing a great trend. So you just buy at the market, or if you're looking for some systematic way to trade, you just wait for a bull close and buy a bull close. Always in direction. If I have to be in the market all day long, long or short, the direction in which I'm currently trading is the always in direction. So when I see this, the market's going down. If I have to be long or short, I want to be short if it's going down. The choice usually is pretty clear. And you can almost always make a choice. The more the market is sideways, the more difficult the choice is, but you can almost always make a choice. Most reversal attempts fail. We've got a bear trend, and we have a pretty good bull reversal bar. But does that look strong enough to reverse this? Probably not. Well, this is probably going to be a bull leg and a bear flag, which it was, and we went lower. And then here we've got a micro double bottom, a high two buy, so two legs down, one pull back two, and then a second entry buy, and a fairly strong rally. And we broke above this high. But this is a minor high. That means that this is probably a bull leg in a trading range. It might be the start of a bull trend, but the bulls really need to get above a major high, the top of the bear breakout. Is this always in long at this point? It might be. Some traders would buy that close. Other traders would say, well, we broke out, but I want to see one more bar. This might simply be about a 50% pullback in this bear trend. And it might be a double top bear flag, slightly higher height, double top bear flag. So what does the next bar look like, the follow through bar? Until we get one more bar or get above this high, a lot of traders will still think this is always in short. I would not be at all uncomfortable getting out of shorts. I would probably get out of shorts here and then wait. And I think maybe you could buy closes here, buy closes here. But if you do, you really need that one more bar. And if you get a bear bar and the market trades below the bear bar, you have to get short again, because the bulls really have not done enough to convince everyone that they have taken control. And look at this. So you've got that bull breakout bar. Let's say you bought the worst price, this close. And then you see this. What's your thought? You're thinking, darn, I knew I should have waited one more bar. This is really disappointing, this bear bar. And what do you do if you bought that close? Well, you're probably going to place a limit order to get out break even. And then look at this bar. It hit your limit order, did not get above it, did not get above this close, and you did not get out. And then this bar closed down. Then what are you going to do? You're going to say, uh oh, I'm in trouble. I bought the high, a lower high and a bear trend. I tried to get out. I could not get out. If this starts to turn down, I got to get out. And that's what happened here. The bears sell again, either below here, a micro double top. You can call it a wedge, one, two, three. You can call it a double top bear flag with a micro double top. Doesn't matter. The bears have to get short below a bear bar. Either below this bar or below this bar. And here the bulls gave up. We have a pair of bear bars closing below their midpoints. The bears have to get short again. And this is what they get short here. Ultimately, this looks like a bear leg in what will become a trading range. But if you're always have to be in the market and you get out of shorts here, you have to get short again here. And if you get long here, you got to get out of your long there or here, and you got to get short. A lot of times you'll see the market looking like this. At this point, we're still always in short. But somewhere in here, you're starting to wonder, are we still short? And if you're not really certain, then you're in a trading range. And trading ranges always have both bottoms and tops. Here we got a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. Here we have a double top bear flag. In general, I always look to the left. What was the last always in direction? It was short. So if I did not want to be reversing constantly in here, it's okay to reverse constantly. But if I did not want to, I would stay short, stop still up here, and then wait for a breakout. If we get a bull breakout, then I'll get up. When not clear, and if you feel like you have to stay in the market, it's better to stay in the direction of what came before. Remember, when a pullback is less than 20 bars, it's a pullback and the trend will probably go down. When it gets more than 20 bars, it gets close to 50-50. In general, it's still slightly higher probability of trend resumption. So bear trend, trading range, trend resumption. So if I'm choosing, until I get a very clear buy setup, maybe this is clear, maybe that's clear, I don't know. Until there's a very clear buy setup, I'm going to stay short. If I have to be staying in the market the whole time, I want to look to the left and find out the last time the market was clear, and I'll stay in that direction. When you're in here, the last clarity was here, so we're probably still always in short. We had minor reversal attempts, but nothing clear. Nothing clearly bullish yet. And what happened ultimately? Well, we got trend resumption down. Now, I said earlier, it's easier to make money if you trade in the always in direction. When the market's doing this, are you selling? The gap between this low, between this high and this low, slight overlap here. The gap between this high and that low. The bears are not making money. And the bulls, no matter where they bought, and for any reason, they are making money. Which do you want to be, a bull or a bear? You obviously, if you have to be in the market, and the market looks like this, you can only be long. It's much easier to make money trading in the always in long direction. Lots of ways to get long. You can buy pullbacks, breakouts of pullbacks. You can buy bear closes, betting that the bear reversal will fail. You can buy below bars, betting that the bear reversal will fail. You can buy for any reason, buy at the market. Again, always in short, easier to make money as a bear. Look for sell setups. A bull break out of a bear microchannel, usually it's going lower. Double top bear flag, or a wedge bear flag going lower. Double top bear flag, double top pullback, so a type of a triangle. It's better to focus on taking the sell signals rather than the buy signals. Now, a swing trade means that traders are looking for a reward that is at least twice as big as their risk. So, if the current move looks like it's likely to reach two times the risk, it's a swing. The market's always in short, probably somewhere in here. Maybe this is a bull flag. Maybe there was a bull trend here, and this is a bull flag. Then we got a bear breakout and bear follow through. So, at this point, the market's always in short, which means the first reversal up, probably will be sold, and there probably will be at least one more leg down. So, at this point, there is clarity. Traders know the market's probably going at least a little bit lower. We got a bear breakout and a follow through bar. So, traders will either sell this close, big bear breakout, consecutive bear bars, or they'll sell that close. Betting that, what's more likely? We're going to reverse up or continue down? It's more likely we're going down. Probability favors the bears. Much easier to make money selling than buying. If you sell here, where's your stop? You could put it all the way up here. But if the trend is strong, it should not even get above this bar. So, above that bar, above this bar. So, putting a stop above the bear breakout bar or the top of the two-bar breakout is also okay. Because if this is a strong bear trend, it should not get there. And your profit target, you could argue based upon the height of the upper range, measure move down, where you're selling already at that place. Another way to do the profit target is a measured move based upon the height of the bear breakout. So, the open of the first bar to the close of this bar, maybe the close of that bar, and then look for a measured move down. This is your initial risk. That's your entry price. This is one times your risk. You can see some traders bought there. And this is two times your risk. And you can see a lot of traders bought there. I think it's very important to always know where your stop has to be. And if unclear, put it way down. The start of the bull leg. Maybe the start of the entire bull trend here. But we have a bull breakout here. And then we have a pullback. If I'm buying here, we may pull back for a couple more legs down. So, I don't want to put my stop below there. I would put my stop below this bear bar here, below the bottom of this bull breakout. If I buy here and my risk is down to here, one time risk is somewhere up there. It's a high probability trade. I'll talk about the math in a little while. High probability trade, you can exit with the reward equals one times risk. So, this is your risk and the reward is the same as the risk. And when the probability is high, the math is okay to exit at one times risk. In general, if you're swing trading, it's better to be trying to go for as much profit as possible. So, two times risk is better. Do you think it's a short here? Do you think it's a short here? Do you think it's a short here? Do you think it's a short here? Do you think it's a short here? No, it's still always in long. So, swing traders are still holding long. Traders equation is a mathematical formula that traders use. At least they think in these terms when they take a trade. Is the trade worth taking? I have an entire video on the traders equation. It incorporates three variables, risk, reward, and probability. So, if I buy here and I put my stop here, that's my risk. If I'm trying to get out here, that's my reward. And pretty strong trend. Is the probability 50-50 that I'm going up here before I get here? Or is the probability higher than 50-50? It's higher than 50-50. So, if I enter here, what's the probability of going up 0.1% before going down 0.1%? 0.8% up versus 0.8% down. 10 ticks up, 10 ticks down. 20 pips up, 20 pips down. I'm looking at the same distance up as down. Pick any distance. What's the likelihood the market is going to go up that distance before it goes down that distance? In a trend like this, it's more likely to go up. I want to trade in the direction of the higher probability. So, wherever my risk is, I want to reward at least that big, knowing that the probability is that I'll make a profit. And if you do the math, when you see this, you know 60% chance it's going there before it goes here. And if you do the math, if you win 60% of the time, risking this much for that much reward, you're going to have a profitable trading system. Here, always in long, always in short. Who knows? Maybe always in long. It's not clear at all. You wait for a break up. And if you get a single bar like this, closing above the high of the past 20, 30, 40 bars, and closing far above the high of these bars, chances are this one bar alone is enough to make the market always in long. In other words, this one bar alone is so unusual that you have bulls who missed the trade. They're hoping for any pullback to buy. And you have bears who sold and sold more higher, and now they believe they're going to lose money. They're hoping for any pullback so they can exit with a smaller loss. Sometimes a single bull bar can make the market always in long. Sometimes it takes two or three small bars. Sometimes it takes four or five or six very small bars to make traders believe that the market is clearly always in long. At this point, the market has a 60% chance of going higher, probably up for a measured move. A reversal attempt like this more likely fires below that bar than sellers, and that we're going higher. Now, I said one big bull bar. Sometimes you get two medium sized bars, and that can make you believe the market's always in long. So at this point, you think it's always in long. Now, maybe you need one more bar. Well, you got it. Now you got the two biggest bars on the screen, both having bull bodies, both closing on their highs, and this bar closing above the high of the past 20 or 30 bars, far above the high of the past 20 or 30 bars. So if you buy here and your stop is here, what's more likely? That it's going to come down here or go up for that same distance? It's more likely it's going to go up. The market is clearly always in long. Even if you get a deep pullback, odds are it's going higher. And you did get a deep pullback. Now you got a triangle, three pushes down, one, two, three. But you have another good bull bar here and another good bull bar here. To me, the odds are it's going up probably for a measured move. I showed the last chart with one big bull trend bar. Here I got two medium bull trend bars and that was all that was required for traders to believe it's always in long. Sometimes you get this instead, three, four, five consecutive bull bars. It's a single big bull bar on a higher timeframe chart. But sometimes this is what you get. When you get this somewhere after the fourth, fifth or sixth bull bar, you say, yeah, I think it's always in long and I think it's going higher. So somewhere in here, traders are beginning to buy closes, betting that we're going to go up for some kind of a measured move. Reversal. At this point, you want to be long or short. Is this enough to make it short? No, we've got a bear bar and then a bull bar. A bear bar. The bears need at least one more bar. So chances are this is simply a 50% pullback from the strong rally and a breakout test of this breakout point. Even with this, we're still always in long and the odds are we're going higher. Always in short, the exact opposite. Sometimes when you get a really big bear bar like this, that's all you need for traders to conclude the market's always in short. The biggest bar on the screen, it's a bear bar. It's closing below all of the prior bars and it's closing far below them. If you sell here and you put a stop up here, what's more likely that it'll hit your stop or fall for a measured move? More likely it's going to go down. Right. You have scale and bulls who bought the low and they see this and they say, yikes, that's terrible. I got to get out. And if it bounces a little bit, I'm going to sell out of my lungs and take a loss. You have bears who say, wow, I was not expecting that. I missed the short. I'm going to sell any little pullback and betting that we're going down. Sometimes a single big bear bar like that is all that's necessary to make traders believe the market's going down. Other times you get a bear bar not big enough to make traders believe always in short, and then you get a second bear bar. So sometimes a pair of consecutive bear bars will be enough for traders to conclude the market's going lower. So at this point, we're always in short, which means you believe the market is more likely to go down than to go up. Traders see this. The bears who are not yet short look for any rally to sell. They'll sell above this bar, they'll sell below that bar, they'll sell below this bar. And the bulls who are scaling in all the way down and buying this low, buying that low, now conclude that it's probably a measuring gap and going lower. So they're going to use any little bounce to sell out of their lungs. Bulls and bears selling probably second leg down. Sometimes you get one big bear bar, but not enough to make you believe it's always in short, and not a great follow through bar. But then you get three, four bear bars, sometimes five or six bear bars. At some point in here, you conclude the market's probably going lower. Probably this bar. We broke below the trading range. We have four consecutive bear bars, three closing on their lows. At this point, you want to buy or sell. What's more likely, that we're going down the height of this range or going up to the top of that? It's more likely that we are going down. When you look at this chart, what's the single dominant feature? Is it this bear doji? Is it this bear doji? Of course not. It's this big bull breakout. Right now, even though we appear to be in a trading range, the dominant feature of the chart is this very strong reversal up. And the odds are, even though we're 20 bars into a trading range, the odds are we're going to resume up. So I always look for something that looks outstanding or exceptional or very unusual. This is very unusual. Unless the bears do something pretty dramatic to reverse that, I'm going to assume that these are just bear legs and a bull flag. Bear bar, bad follow through. Small bear bar, bad follow through. Bear bar, bad follow through. Bear bar, bull body. Tails below bars. To me, this looks like a bear leg in a trading range. And probably it's simply a big bull flag. So I'm only looking to buy. In this video, I talked about how charts are always either in a trend or in a trading range. And I talked about the importance of the always in direction. If I have to be in the market at any time, do I want to be long or short? What's the direction that more likely will lead to a profit? Finally, I talked a little bit about the trader's equation. The math has to be good. Pay attention to the risk, the reward, and the probability when I make a decision to take a trade and make decisions on managing the trade. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of three videos on always in trading.