 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading major trend reversal tops. Whenever you're in any trade, you always have to have a plan to take profits. Major top, so expect two legs sideways to down to some kind of a support level. Maybe this high or low, maybe here, maybe all the way to the bottom of this wedge. Plenty of room for a profit if we get down to the most recent major high or low. Major because it led to a new high and it had a lot of decent bull bars on the way up. It's still a bull trend as long as it stays above the most recent major high or low. However, at this point, a bear breakout, decent follow through, wedge top. The market's probably always in short and we'll probably get at least a small second leg down. This might be the second leg. This might be the second leg. Or this could be the first leg and then a triangle and then a second leg. You don't know for sure until you see it play out. A trading range around a 50% pullback after a wedge top. That is common, but it's still reasonable to hold short. Part of the reason for this trading range is the bears who sold below the spare bar had a risk here. And one times their actual risk was here. Some of the bears took profit at one times actual risk because they were disappointed by these bull bars. They were afraid that instead of a reversal into a bear trend, it might simply be a bear leg into a trading range. It's reasonable to take your profits at two times initial risk, which would be down here. Two times actual risk, I don't have it drawn in. You sell below this bar, you get filled here. Your actual risk is to just above this high. And this is probably around two times actual risk. It's reasonable to get out here. We have an attempt to reverse back up. Probably a second leg down from the spare breakout. Well, this is a second leg down. It's reasonable to get out above this bull bar. Here we have a failed breakout below this small double bottom. And we have a micro double bottom. Also reasonable to get out above this bull bar. Even though it's only one times your initial risk and you really wanted two times, it's reasonable to get out. You can stay short, keeping your stop up here, maybe above the top of this bull bar. But if you stay short after the market is trying to reverse up like this, you have to keep your stop at the appropriate place. Don't panic out and just rely on your stop. Also, whenever you have a wedge top and you get a reversal, the reversal usually lasts about half as many bars as there were in the wedge. Here's how many bars in the wedge. And this is not quite half. And therefore, we still might get more down. This might simply be a triangle pullback after the first leg goes down. First leg down and then triangle pullback and then we might get a second leg down. Remember, most major trend reversals only have about a 40% chance of a swing profit. And it's always reasonable to take partial profits using limit orders at support. And one support would be two times actual risk. Again, actual risk is from your entry price to above the high of the pullback. And this would be around two times actual risk. You sell below this bar, you get filled here, this pink line. Your actual risk is to one tick above the high of this pullback bar. If you had a stop there, you don't know that in advance. But if your stop actually was there, that was the total amount that you actually risk from your entry price to that pink line. And two times actual risk is right here. Your actual risk was only seven ticks and two times actual risk is 14 ticks. And as long as it fell 15 or more ticks from your entry, you could exit at two times actual risk. And therefore taking partial or full profits right here makes sense mathematically. And that's part of the reason why we're reversing here. Bears taking partial or full profits. But look what happened. The bears who held short, relying on their stock, and they sat through all of this, got a windfall profit all the way down to the bottom of the chart. If you did get out for any reason, you have to be looking to sell again. You could sell on the strong bear reversal, two big bear bars, or you could wait until the close of this bar. At that point, the odds are high that we'll go at least a little bit lower. Whenever you have a wedge top, you're looking for two legs down. And if the legs look too small, then they're probably simply part of a bigger first leg. Then you look for a bigger second leg down. And therefore it is reasonable to hold short even after these strong reversal attempts. Whenever you have a higher high major trend reversal, in this case a wedge, you always have to be thinking that it probably will be followed by a lower high major trend reversal attempt. We tried to get a double top bear flag here, double top lower high. Did not work. Then we have another attempt at a double top or an expanding triangle top for a lower high. Okay signal bar, but we went above it. Not really good stop entry selling unless you're going to use a stop up here. Tight trading range, 30 bars sideways. Nothing is clear until you get a couple of strong breakout bars. If you sell at this point, higher probability, stop further away. Less profit remaining in the trade, but reasonable to sell if you can react quickly. One of the problems is if the market's in a very tight range like this for 20 bars, it's easy to not be ready to trade. And therefore, when you get this breakout, it's hard to sell. But with experience, you can do that. Whenever you do get a lower high major trend reversal after a higher high major trend reversal, it often is basically a tight trading range. But within it, there's often some kind of a pattern like an expanding triangle or a double top or double top here. A bear reversal and then a small wedge rally. If you're prepared for a bigger second leg down, you can be selling. Expanding triangle. And you could sell below this bar and put a stop up here. If I sold below this, I would probably keep my stop up here. You got two bull bars, a decent sized bull bar. Might go a little bit higher. You're betting on a lower high major trend reversal and a second leg down after the wedge. I think the best stop is up here. A small wedge lower high after a bear reversal. If you want, you can call it a nested head and shoulders top, left shoulder, head, right shoulder, and the right shoulder subdivided into a smaller head and shoulders top, left shoulder. And then a small double top for the head and then a small right shoulder. Tight trading range. You can see all kinds of patterns. You can see buy patterns and sell patterns, but it's reasonable to take the short because there's at least a 40% chance you're going to get the bear breakout after the wedge top. There's a 40% chance you're going to get bull trend resumption up. And then 20% chance you may just stay sideways for a lot of bars maybe to the end of the session. Again, if you're quick to understand what's going on, you just sell the close or simply sell at the market. A lot of times you don't have time to sell the close exactly. So when the bar is about to close or as soon as it closes or right after it closes, you just hit sell the market. The bulls are giving up. The bears are getting aggressive. You don't want to be looking to buy for at least several bars. Whenever the risk is small, for example, if you sell below this bear bar and put your stop above the high of that bar, you have low probability. In general, whenever you have a small risk, it's a mistake to put your stop right above the top of the signal bar. It's better to use a wider stop, measure move up, or look to the left for some alternative stop. Since we have a wedge top and two legs down are likely, it's reasonable to put your stop here. Also, the swing bears who sold up here and are holding short do not have a reason yet to use a tighter stop. If there's a strong bear breakout, then they can lower their stop. But all through here, the correct stop for the bears is still up here. If you did sell below this bear bar and you get stopped out, you got to look to sell again. For example, on the outside down, because at that point we have a micro-tobal top or on the close of this bear bar. Anytime any stop is hit, there's a 50% chance that the bull breakout will continue higher and 50% chance the breakout will fail and reverse back down. It's very common for the market to have strong moves in the wrong direction. In other words, they appear to be going one way, that attempt fails, and then you have an even stronger move in the opposite direction. Here you have a strong bear breakout, bad follow through, and we got a reversal back up. Experienced bears, instead of getting stopped out here, they'll sell. They see that people made money selling at this high. They made money selling at this high. They'll be selling at this high, putting a stop above here. This is the most recent major top, and therefore, bears selling for any reason would put their stop up here. Again, half the time if a stop gets hit, the breakout will fail. It's simply the market probing, testing the strength of the bulls and the bears. Either you get a bull breakout and the bears give up, or you get a bear reversal and the bulls give up. In this case, the bulls gave up. As I said, you could put your stop above the high of this pair of bear bars. Weak bears will do that. Strong bears will keep their stop up here. And strong bears will be selling above bars. They sold at this high right here. They sold above this high right here. And strong bears will sell with limit orders at this high as well and put their stop right here. Weak bulls will be buying these breakouts, hoping that the trading range will convert into a bull trend. And that's usually the worst thing to do. Selling at the bottom, buying at the top. Strong traders do the opposite. They buy at the bottom and they sell at the top. There's simply not enough bulls to get the bull trend to resume. And the bulls are giving up and the bears are winning. And then this strong breakout is a sign that the bulls are finally giving up. This is a give up bar, a big bear trend bar, consecutive bear trend bars. And you can see when this bar opened, it opened below the close of that bar. Traders were selling. As soon as the bar closed, they sold. Same here. The open of this bar is below the close of this bar. Aggressive selling. Bears are selling to get short. Bulls are selling to give up. If you did hold for leg one, pull back leg two. And now we're at the bottom of the entire bull trend. And we're getting a reasonably strong reversal up and a micro double bottom. We went down on this bar and then up, down on this bar, up again. And a pretty good bull reversal bar. It could be simply a two legged move and a big trading range. Leg one, pull back leg two. This could be a large second leg trap. It's reasonable to get out above the high of this bar. Even though it's probably a minor reversal, it could lead to an abrupt reversal. We're in a tight trading range here. So some strong bulls will buy at the prior low. They'll buy at this low, get filled here. For scalp, they'll buy at this low, they get filled here. And they'll buy at this low and they get filled here. And they do not panic out. Some bulls will hold short. And then when there's a strong bull bar, they'll buy more above the high of this bar, expecting the market to come back to their original entry price, which it ultimately did. If you sold here and you took profits here, you made about eight points. Can you wait to take profits? If you do, at this point, I think you have consecutive good bull bars. You have a reversal up from the bottom of a possible trading range. It's reasonable to exit there or even exit here. If you did not get out here, I think you have to get out here and certainly no worse than here. We have a bull bar, a bull follow through bar, even though it's a doji. You have to have a reason to get out. And the market is probably always in lung at this point. I think it's almost certainly always in lung at this point. And that means we're probably going at least a little bit higher. And you don't want to take a chance that you're going to give back all of your profits. This is probably the best exit. We're reversing up from the bottom of the chart, possibly the bottom of a trading range. And trading ranges often have two legs, one pull back two. And the second leg is often very strong, making traders believe the trading range is converting into a bear trend. When in fact, it could simply be a second leg trap, a very strong second leg trapping traders into selling at the bottom. And then the market reverses up. You have to be prepared for that. If you have a big windfall profit like this, you have to take at least partial profits. I would get out of everything above a good bull bar, micro double bottom, failed breakout. Bull trend, bear breakout, high or high major trend reversal. We have a 20 or 30 bar very tight channel. This is probably a minor reversal, which means the best the bears probably get is a trading range and not a bear trend. It's pretty common when you take a short to have the market come all the way back to your entry price. Part of the reason for that is the bulls will look at this and say, it's a minor reversal. I'm going to buy below that bar and put my stop down here, betting that the reversal will not get down here. And I can buy more lower if it goes down and I can get out break even because it's probably going to reverse up and form a trading range. If a bull buys here and it goes right up, he makes his profit. If he buys here and puts a stop down here, he can buy more lower, betting that it'll come back and test his original entry price. Very common for the first reversal up to go up to the low of the sell signal bar, which is one tick above your entry price. You enter one tick below that bar. It's very common for the pullback to hit your entry price and stop you up if you have a break even stop. Strong bears, if they're expecting a major trend reversal, they'll rely on their stop above the top of the bear trend, allowing for the possibility that this is simply a test of the breakout price, a test of the entry price, trapping weak bears out. However, if you see a strong reversal like this, a strong bar like this, and now we're getting a third reversal up, we're still forming a higher low in a broad bull channel. You have to get out. You could get out above this bull bar. It did not go above this bull bar. But now we're getting another reversal attempt. So had you short of this, hoping for a swing down, you have to get out on some kind of reversal. Here you got a third push up, a small expanding triangle. Here you have a bull bar. I would definitely get out above that bull bar if I did not get out above here or above here, because this is probably a minor reversal, not a major reversal. There are too many bars up since the first bear break below a trend line, and therefore you have to start the process over again. So, let's see if the bull bar is going to go up. Whenever the market comes up and hits a break-even stop, and then the bear trend resumes like this, you never want it to get back to the break-even stop a second time. If it does get there, you're usually going to get higher prices. We have a gap up and a bull trend. And we're working higher. We have a new high here, a first reversal down, and now we're getting a second reversal down. You can argue wedge top, one, two, three. However, look at the channel, this rally. How much selling pressure is there? We got three bars here, three bars here, three bars in the pullback here. But how deep are the pullbacks? How big are the bear bars? The pullbacks are very small. This is a small pullback bull trend, and selling reversals from a new high probably will result in a minor reversal and a resumption of the bull trend. Bull trends are always forming wedge tops. Bear trends are always forming wedge bottoms. Eighty percent of them fail. Weak sell setup, certainly for a stop entry short, and therefore it's a bad sell. Better to wait for a stronger sell setup. Almost certainly, there are more buyers below this sell signal bar than sellers, and we're probably going higher. They bought at the low of this bar, made money, even though it pulled back a few bars. They bought at the low of these bars, and made money, even though it pulled back a few bars. And that's probably true here as well. They'll buy below that bar, buy below this bar, bidding that the bear reversal attempts will fail, and the bull channel will continue higher. We have a bull trend, a biclimax, and a couple legs sideways, maybe a triangle. Three pushes down, one pullback, two pullback, three pullback, and try to resume up. Now we have a small double top, higher high, major trend reversal, and a second entry sell. First entry, second entry, even a third entry sell. Now, is this a good major trend reversal setup? You could say, well, Al, it broke below the bull trend line and went sideways about five or ten bars. Yes, but how close did it get to the moving average? Where are the consecutive big bars? We have a pair of consecutive big bars here, but this is probably a pause after a biclimax, and then we have trend resumption up. Not much selling pressure at all. The pullbacks are small, lasting one bar, lasting two or three bars, and they're not falling very far at all. This is a small pullback gold trend, and on a higher timeframe chart, it's a bull breakout. On a higher timeframe chart, this looks like this, and it's a low probability bet if you're looking to sell. Calling this a higher high, major trend reversal is a mistake. It's not a major reversal. It's a minor reversal, and a minor reversal usually becomes a bull flag or a trading range. A minor reversal, you get trend resumption up, minor reversal, trend resumption up, minor reversal, trend resumption up, is much more likely than trend reversal down. The market has not touched the moving average in 20, 30, 40 bars. So a 20 gap bar buy setup. Probably bulls will buy the first touch of the moving average. A weak sell setup, and therefore better only to look to buy. And you can see when it got down to the moving average, you got four consecutive bear bars, all closing below their midpoints, but there were buyers at the moving average. And now we have a high two bull flag at the moving average. These are buy setups, not sell setups. Also, we have a negative gap. This low, barely pull back below this breakout point. And a negative gap, common and small pullback bull trends. Traders will buy the resumption up, looking for some kind of a measure to move up. Whenever you take any trade, you should always have some idea of where you'll take profits, and under what circumstances you'll take profits. You always need a plan. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading major trend reversal tops. So we're gonna get permission to bank attorney. Cover with dudes more. They'll make a difference. We are up in places. The road we have an apple treasury التي has been bounced. Still not fingerprinting. Your false impression is more famous. This is a test is a test is an anti gamma azalee that way through it.