 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of three videos on the market cycle. When I'm trading, I always think of every chart as either being in a trend or in a trading range. For that matter, I think of every bar as either being a trend bar or a trading range bar. Now, I have a rule, my Al Brooks 80% rule, that markets have inertia and they tend to continue to do what they've been doing. So, if a market's in a trend, 80% of reversal attempts will fail. If it's in a trading range, 80% of breakout attempts will fail. Finally, I'm going to talk a little bit about definitions, trends, swings, legs. Now, look at this chart. Bear trend, bull trend, bear trend, bull trend. Bull trend has higher lows and higher highs. Same chart, bear trend has lower highs and lower lows. And same with over here. Trading range, it always contains components of an early bull trend and an early bear trend. So, this is a trading range, but it has a higher low. This is a trading range. It has a lower high, so it has a bear trend, but it also has possibly a bull flag, a wedge bull flag after this bull trend and a 50% pullback. So, it's also a bull trend. So, trading range, anytime you see the market going sideways and there looks like a reasonable sell setup, here we got a double top, so neckline, so double top bear flag. But we also have a higher low major trend reversal. Here we have a head and shoulders top, but we also have a wedge bull flag and a 50% pullback. Anytime you look at a section of the chart and you can come up with a reasonable buy setup and a reasonable sell setup, you have to assume the market's in a trading range. Trading ranges can be any size. They can be a single bar. They can be 100 bars or more. When the pullback is brief, like one bar, five bars, even sometimes 10 to 20 bars, if the context is right, the odds are the trend will continue. When there's a trading range in a bull trend or in a bear trend and the trend is likely to continue, I call the trading range a pullback. It's a pause in the trend and you expect the trend to continue. Bull trend, pause, small trading range, so I call it a pullback. Odds are the trend will continue. So the breakout usually is in the direction of the trend. Now look at this. Let's say this is a five minute chart. It's a five bar pullback and a five minute chart. On a 60 minute chart, it's probably no pullback at all. And if you look at a one minute chart, it's 25 bar pullback. So all pullbacks, even though the odds are on the five minute chart, the trend will resume up because it has more than 20 bars on the one minute chart. The one minute chart could easily trend down further instead of trending up. So the probability is more neutral. Ultimately, even if it did trend down further because of the five minute chart, if it came down here, even for a measured move down, the odds will still be that it would go up. But on the one minute chart, because it has 25 bars, 50% chance that it will resume up 50% chance there'll be a bear breakout. But even if there is a bear breakout, it would still be a pullback on the five minute chart. And therefore, the bull trend would likely resume. Here we have a one minute chart and a 25 bar trading range. Well, 25 bar trading range and a higher timeframe chart could be simply a pullback in this bull trend. And in fact, obviously it is on a five minute chart. This 25 bar trading range on the one minute chart is just a five bar trading range on a five minute chart. So all pullbacks are trading ranges on smaller timeframes and all trading ranges are pullbacks on higher timeframes. As I said, once a pullback lasts 20 bars, 30 bars, 40 bars, the prior trend is so far to the left that it loses influence and the market becomes increasingly neutral. Usually when a pullback grows to 20 bars or more, I call it a trading range. And once I do, what I'm saying is the probability of trend reversal up now is as great as the probability of trend resumption down. So the market has lost its direction and the bulls and bears have become balanced. So the market's in breakout mode, which means it can break to the upside. Same probability, it could break to the downside. And when it does break out, traders will look for a measured move. So if it breaks to the downside, they'll look for a move that's this high down here. If it breaks to the upside, they look for a move equal to the height of the range going up. And here we have trend reversal. Bear trend, head and shoulders top, bear flag. But we ended up getting a bull breakout. Because, as I said, once a pullback grows to 20 or more bars, it's a trading range and it's neutral. And the probability of a reversal is about the same as the probability of trend resumption. Bear trend, trading range, 20 or more bars, probably about 40 bars here. 50-50 chance you'll get a reversal. 50-50 chance you'll get trend resumption down. For the bulls, they see a double bottom bull flag. They want to break out above the neckline. They should move up. And for the bears, they see a double bottom. And they expect the double bottom to fail. So they see a lower high and a bear channel. Another lower high. And they're expecting the downside break out. Which they got. And they're also expecting the breakout to go about a measured move based upon the height of the range. So here's the height of the range. Measured move down is around there. And here's the measured move. My 80% rule, inertia. Inertia means that an object tends to continue what it has been doing. And markets tend to continue what they've been doing. If you want to know what the bars to the right look like, the ones that you do not see, they probably look like the bars to the left. Whenever you're in a trend, a bear trend, the market's constantly trying to reverse. But 80% of the reversal attempts will fail. They become bear flags. And the trend continues. Every time it reverses, bear flag. It reverses again, bear flag. You can call this a wedge or a low 2 bear flag. You can call it a double top bear flag. Doesn't matter. Here, a very strong reversal up. But it's still a lower high. So it's a double top with that. Smaller double top with that. Even with the strong reversal up, it's still not enough to reverse the trend. We're still getting lower highs and lower lows. Lots of reversal attempts. Good looking buy signal bar. Good looking buy signal bar. Micro double bottom. Full inside bar here. Trying to reverse up. Trying to reverse up. It's constantly trying to reverse. All trends are constantly trying to reverse. And 80% of the reversal attempts failed. Now look at this. We're in a sideways market. And as I said, markets continue to do what they've been doing 80% of the time. And what are we doing here? Well, we're going down. No, we're going up. We're going down. We're going up. Well, what do you think the bars to the right look like? Probably the ones to the left. So trading ranges are constantly trying to break out. New low, new low, new high. But 80% of the breakout attempts fail. So lots of new lows. Lots of new highs. But markets have inertia. That's my 80% rule. 80% of trading range breakouts fail. 80% of trend reversal attempts fail. And now, I want to talk a little bit about terms. Sometimes you hear traders talk about swings and pullbacks and legs and trading ranges. And they don't really explain exactly what they're meaning. And a lot of traders use the terms differently. I tend to use them in a fairly conventional way. And sometimes the terms are interchangeable. So is this a leg? Is it a swing? Is it a trend? Yes, it's all of those things. Trends usually, you're thinking about 10, 20, 30 bars. This is an early trend. Trends are made up of legs. It has a bull leg, a bear leg, a bull leg, a bear leg, a bull leg. And swings are also made up of legs. So we've got a bull swing, bear swing. A swing simply means a leg that's far enough to make a swing profit. So swing profit usually is about four times the size of a scalp. If you're talking about a forex market, a scalp might be 10 pips. So a swing would be 40 pips or more. If the legs are 40 pips or more, I would call them swings. If they're less than 40 pips, I would call them legs. The entire chart is a bull trend because it's getting higher lows and higher highs. And within it, there are swings down, certainly legs. Anytime I see a trend, any move, I call a leg. Leg up, leg down, leg up, leg down. If the leg is big enough for a swing trade, I call it a swing. And if it's a series of higher highs and higher lows lasting a lot of bars, I call it a trend. What's going on here? Is this a bare leg, a bare swing? Is this a bare leg, bare swing? Or is it a leg in a trading range? Doesn't matter. If I call this a trading range, I would call that a bare leg, a bull leg, a bare leg that's subdivided into smaller legs. Down leg and up leg and down leg. So in general, any small move, I tend to call it a leg. A bigger move where a person can make a swing profit, I tend to call it a swing. And if the trend lasts for most of the chart, I tend to call it a trend. In general, any time there's a diagonal move up or down and it occupies most of the screen, I call it a trend. And if there are more than two on the screen, I don't use trend. If there are just two, I'll call it a trend. So this is a bare trend, this is a bull trend. But if I start to see three or four trends on the screen, I stop calling them trends, I call them swings. If I start to see five or ten, I start to call them legs. So there's a bear trend and there's a bull trend. Bull trend has higher highs and lows. Well, I distinguish higher highs and lows into major and minor. A major higher low is a higher low that has a strong breakout usually to a new high. So that's a major higher low. And this is a minor higher low. It's a higher low, but the breakout is not all that strong. So more likely it's a leg in a trading range. These are major higher lows, major higher low, major, followed by a strong bull breakout usually to a new high. Not always, but usually to a new high. If it's a trend, bulls tend to raise their stop to just below the most recent major higher low. For example, if a bull bought here, he would not raise a stop here. He would keep it below the most recent major higher low. And as long as the market's making major higher lows, it's in a bull trend. And if it falls below a major higher low, bulls will start getting stopped out. And the bull trend probably has evolved into a trading range, possibly into a bear trend. So you want the pullbacks to stay above major higher lows. Minor higher lows, as I said, these are all minor. They do not lead to strong bull breakouts. And they're usually legs in trading ranges. So a minor higher low. So we went below it, but we're still in a bull trend. Minor higher low, a lower one, a lower one. But when you see these, do you think the trend has converted into a bear trend? No, as long as it's still above the bottom of the most recent strong bull breakout, a major higher low is still a bull trend. These are all minor and you'd expect them to be part of a trading range or part of a pullback. So is this major or minor? It's a higher low. It held above the bottom of this major higher low. Major because there's a strong breakout, we high. This is followed by a breakout, but not a strong breakout. Small bar here, small bar there. Doji, bear bar. So this is probably a minor higher low. But because it's minor, the market could easily fall below it and still be in a bull trend. The market fell below a minor higher low, but it's still held above a major higher low. And therefore, it's still a bull trend. It led to a bull leg in a trading range and not a bull leg in a bull trend. It did not lead to a strong breakout to a new high. And trading ranges have legs up, they have legs down, and sometimes the legs down fall below minor higher lows. Lower low, but it converted the bull trend into a trading range. We have a bear breakout and a lower low, but we held above the major higher low. So at this point, pullback grew into a trading range, a trading range still in a bull trend. The odds still favor trend resumption up. I said before that if a trading range grows to 20 or more bars, the probability of a reversal becomes equal to, or close to, equal to the probability of trend resumption. And I was careful with my word selection. And I said close to. Every bar that gets added reduces the probability of a bull breakout. But as long as the market's holding above the prior higher low, the probability still is slightly greater for the bulls. So at 20 bars, it's close to 50-50, maybe 53% bull breakout, 47% bear breakout. But as long as it's holding above the higher low, and does not have a strong reversal down, the odds still are slightly greater that the market will resume up. Trading range, one leg down, a little bit complex. Pullback, and the second leg down. Large high two bull flag. One leg down, pullback. Two legs down. And the second leg down also subdivided. It went down, up, and down. Still above the bottom of the major higher low, the bottom of this bull breakout. Not just the bar, but the bottom, the breakout began here. It's good that it stays above the bottom of the bar. It's better that it stays above the bottom of the bull leg. And it's better that it stays above the bottom of the entire swing. Most bulls would put their stop down here, maybe below here. Major because strong breakout to a new high. Rally here was only a bull leg in a trading range, not a resumption of the bull trend. Bear trend, strong breakouts. Two bar, three bar breakout here, breakout. Lots of breakouts here. And this is a pretty major lower high, followed by a strong breakout to a new low. As long as it's a bear trend, rallies should not get above this high. So that's a pretty major high. Now, is this a major lower high? Well, it probably is. You get three bear bars closing on their lows, two of them pretty decent size. So at this point, a lot of bears will put their stop above this high. Now, I said earlier that a major reversal like this does not always lead to a new extreme. So in this case, I think this is major enough so that bears would tighten their stops to here. We move the stop from here to here after they see that third bear bar. Even though we did not get to a new low, it's a strong enough breakout to make bears tighten their stops. And the market should not get above this high. I call it a major lower high. It's obviously not as major as this, but still most bulls would start buying above that high. Most bears would get out above that high. So it's a major reference point. A major lower high usually gets a breakout to a new low. Usually, not always. Every time you get the breakout, traders tighten the stops. Strong breakout, lower the stop to just above the most recent lower high, the most recent major lower high. Is this the lower high? I would say up here is where I put my stop. Pull back sometimes can have two, three, four legs. So we've got one leg, a low one, low two, and then a low three. So this is a low three and a lower high in a bear trend. So you can call it a wedge bear flag. You can call it a wedge lower high. But it's a major lower high. And each one of these pushes up creates a minor lower high. This did not have a strong breakout to a new low. This had a one bar breakout, but not all that strong. Did not even fall below this bull bar. And here, another bull breakout. Pretty decent bear breakout. So I would call these two minor lower highs. And then by the time this third bar closes, I would call that a major lower high. Minor lower high usually leads to little legs in the trading range and not reversals or resumptions down. We're going down for one bar. Trading range price action here. So is this a major or a minor lower high? Is this the major lower high or is this? Well, this clearly is a major lower high. This, I think, is not major enough. We had a couple bar breakout. Not enough of a pullback. So I think this is simply a pause in this strong bear breakout. I personally would not put my stop above that. I would keep my stop up here. And you can see this one above that. This is, I think, a minor lower high. And this is a minor lower high. This is the major lower high. And when you're in a bear trend, and it starts to get a pullback with a lot of bars, very often it goes above minor lower highs. But the trend is still intact. And you expect another new low. If it goes above a major lower high, the bear trend, most traders would look at the bear trend as being over. And when a bear trend ends, usually it converts into a trading range. Sometimes it will immediately convert into an opposite trend. For a bull trend, you need a strong bull breakout and follow through above major lower highs. We broke above a lower high. We broke above a lower high. So we've got a breakout here. That is not a strong bull breakout. It's just one bar with terrible follow through. So you need breakout and follow through. So we've got a decent breakout but bad follow through. And it did not get above a major lower high. It just went above minor lower highs. So this is probably not a bull trend. It's probably a bull leg in a trading range or a bull leg in a bear trend. Sometimes you get major lower highs. And as I said, they're not always followed immediately by a new low. For example, here we have three consecutive bear bars breaking below a wedge bull flag. I think this is enough for traders to believe the trend has resumed. Even though we did not get down to a new low. I would call that a major lower high as I said. Over here, look at this. We've got a double top and then a breakout. I would call this a major lower high. The bears do not want the market going back above a double top after a decent breakout and a new low. Even though it looks relatively minor, I think a lot of the bears after this breakout lower their stops to above this double top. If a trend lasts only about a third of the chart or less, it's minor. Remember I said that if there's only one trend on the screen, I call it a trend. Sometimes you'll get two trends on the screen and I'll still call them trends if they clearly are trends. But if you get three or more trends on the screen, I stop using the term trend and I start using other phrases like a leg or a swing or a pullback. And it doesn't matter what you call it. I tend to use the terms in particular ways. Every move is a leg up or down small, even if it's only one bar, it's a leg. So everything is a leg. And if it's big enough for a swing trade, I call it a swing. If it's big enough, if there are only two moves on the entire chart. So like big up, big down, I call it a trend. This is also, it's a leg down in a bull trend. And any time you have a leg down in a bull trend and the trend resumes, that leg is also a pullback. So this is a bare leg and a bull trend, but you expect the bull trend to resume, so it's a pullback. And here we have a very strong breakout and I would say it's another swing up. You can call it a bull leg, but when it's strong enough for a swing trade, I tend to use the term swing trade. And then here we have a pause after a bull breakout. And we would call that a pullback, a bull flag. You know, you can call it a small sideways leg if you want. I would not call it a swing because nobody can make a swing profit there. And I would not call it a trend. So it's either a pullback or you can say a sideways leg. The swing usually lasts 10 to 20 bars and goes far enough for a swing profit. So a swing profit in general, about three, four, five times bigger than the smallest scalp. Bear swing, bull swing, bear swing, bull swing. Legs, I tend to use the term for moves that are too small for a swing. So sometimes it's just one or two bars. I generally use the term pullback. But if you start to get five or ten bars, I tend to use the term leg. And they're usually parts of trading ranges or pullbacks and trends. So smaller than a swing. And a pullback is the smallest type of leg. So we've got a leg down, pullback, small leg down, and a bull trend. Pull breakout above a bear channel. Little leg down, little leg up, little leg down. And you can say these are two little legs and a bigger leg, a bigger bull flag. This went down far enough for a swing profit. So you can call it a swing down. Or you could simply say a leg down in what appears to be a developing trading range. Bull legs, bull leg here, bull leg there, bull leg here. Not really big enough for a swing, so I'd call it a bull leg. This is big enough for a swing, so you can call it a bull swing. Is it big enough for a trend? I don't know. You might call it an early bull trend or a swing up. Bull legs, a larger bull leg or big enough for a swing, so I'd call it a swing. To me, we're not getting enough in terms of consecutive relentless big bull trend bars. We have a pair of bull trend bars here, but we're still below that high. We broke above the high here, but could not close above it. I would tend to call this more of a swing up than a trend. In this video, I talked about the market cycle and how every chart is either in a trend or a trading range. Every part of every chart is either in a trend or a trading range. In fact, every bar is either a trend bar or a trading range bar. And then I also talked about my 80% rule. The market has inertia. It tends to continue what it's been doing, and it tends to resist change. If it's in a trend, 80% of reversal attempts will fail. If it's in a trading range, 80% of attempts to break out into a trend will fail. And then finally, I talked about definitions. Any move up or down on a chart is a leg. If the leg goes up far enough or down far enough for a swing trade, I tend to call it a swing. And if there's clearly a strong trend breaking out far beyond the bars to the left, as long as there are only one or two such big swings on the chart, I tend to call it a trend. If there are three or more, I tend to call them swings. And I tend to look at the chart as being in a trading range. This is Al Brooks. Again, thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of three videos on the market cycle.