 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Rating Course. This is the second of four videos on losing because of mistakes. I'm going to focus on bad management in this particular video, which is a major cause of losing money. From the Trader's Equation, traders know that even if you only have a 40% probability of achieving your goal, it's a profitable strategy if you exit with a reward two times your risk. Reward twice risk, even with a probability of only 40%, is a profitable strategy. Since only 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout, 90% of them are not. 90% of the bars are either in a bull channel or a bear channel or a trading range. And during these bars, 90% of the bars on the chart, bulls and bears can make money by managing trades correctly because the probability is between 40 and 60% for any time in here for bulls or bears. Selling at the low, selling at the high, buying at the high, buying at the low. If you can manage your trade correctly, for example, scaling in using appropriate stops, you can make money. The reason why most traders lose money is because they do not manage their trades well. A lot of times they'll come in with a plan to do something and they honestly believe they're going to execute their plan. But when it comes time to make a decision, they don't do it. They don't have the emotional ability to do what they know is right. And the result is they lose money. 90% of the time, if you manage your trade well, you can get out without a loss or with only a small loss or you make money. If you manage your trade well, you can save even a bad trade. You can buy at the top of a trading range, sell at the bottom of the trading range. And if you manage properly, you can either avoid a loss or make money. Again, that's during 90% of the bars. If you're selling in a strong breakout, you're probably going to lose money because there's a 70% chance the market's going higher. Whereas in here, there's only a 60% chance that the market is going higher after a rally and only a 60% chance it's going to go lower at most. The probabilities for the most part are between 40 and 60%. For example, let's say you sold below the neckline of this double top. We have a double top. Here's the neckline. If you sell with a stop just below this low, you'd get filled right here. If you use a wide stop, maybe a measured move up based upon the height of this first leg up, and then waited for a bear bar and sold more below the low of that bear bar. And then from there used a fairly wide stop. If you sell with a stop, you should be able to make money or at least avoid a loss. Traders who sold here sell more with a stop here are hoping that the market comes back to their entry price at this low so they can get out break even on their first sell and with a profit on their second sell. You want the second sell to be at least two to three times the size of a minimum scalp above the first entry so that if it comes down to your target, you'll make two to three times the size of a minimum scalp. Here the market got down to the target late in the session, did not fill it, had to go one tick below that low for you to get out break even on this sell. It reversed up again a second time. You're getting late in the session, reasonable to get out. And if you did that, you would have lost a small amount on your first sell and you would have made a bigger amount on your second sell. And you would have made a small net profit even though you were selling at the bottom of a bull flag in a bull trend. If you're a beginner, would you have done that? Of course not. You probably would have sold the reversal even though it's a bull trend. However, you probably would have gotten out maybe here. This is a give up bar, a sign that the weak bears are giving up and you would never have been able to add to your position. Also, your account size is probably too small and you probably are trading too large of a position to add on here and use the appropriate stock. So your intention was good thinking that I'll sell here. If it goes higher, I'll sell more. But when it actually goes higher, emotionally, you're scared of losing too much money and you get out here instead of managing your trade appropriately. You had an unrealistic goal for where you were emotionally as a trader and for the size of your account. And you probably were trading too big of a position to allow you to execute that goal. You cared too much. You were thinking too much about losing money. And the result was you could not manage the trade properly. We're in a bull trend and let's say you bought here. You got a small bull flag and you put your stop appropriately below the most recent major high or low. Here you are buying what turned out to be just about the high of the day. If you manage your trade correctly, 90% chance you'll either make a little money or you'll avoid a loss. The market sold off for a couple of legs. One, pull back two. And you have a bull bar closing on its high. You're pulling back to the moving average. Traders can buy more on a stop above that bull bar as long as this is at least two to three times the size of a scalp below the first entry. In a strong bull trend like this, a lot of traders will buy even if it's only one times the size of a minimum scalp. So let's say this is a forex market. A trader will buy as long as this is 10 pips below his first entry. If it's the E-mini, he'll buy as long as it's one point below his first entry. He's disappointed by the extent of the sell off. And now he's thinking that maybe it's a trading range instead of a bull friend. If it's a trading range, he does not want to be buying high. So he's looking to exit on his first entry, break even, and he'll get out with a scalp on his second entry. He avoided a loss. In fact, he made a small profit, even buying at the high of what became a trading range. It sounds easy to do, but these things are things that beginners simply cannot do. Over time, you can do it. You don't get emotional about the market going against you. You know, as long as it stays above this low, it's either a bull trend and you'll make a quick profit, or it'll be a trading range and you'll be able to avoid a loss. That sounds good, but it's very difficult for a beginner to do. He knows it's the right thing to do, but he's thinking so much about money that he cannot do it. If you cannot manage a trade correctly, you cannot take the trade. You cannot buy here, put a stop below here, and then plan to add on here if you're going to be afraid, if it's too much money. If you cannot take the trade and manage it properly, simply wait for a trade that you can manage properly. Experts also lose money by taking bad trades. However, they don't take bad trades very often, and they usually get out pretty quickly as soon as they decide it's a bad trade. Some trades are simply very difficult to structure profitably. It's very difficult to structure a profitable trader's equation. One is selling in a strong bull breakout. That's a mistake. Another is buying in a tight trading range, especially with a stop water. If you do something and you within the next minute decide you made a mistake, or at any time you decide you made a mistake, it's usually better just to get out and take the loss. And that's part of trade management, and that's what expert traders do. They manage their trades well, so when they get a loss, the loss is not too big. Let's say you see a micro double top. The market went up and then down and then up again, and we're breaking below the micro double top. You can call it a double bottom or breaking below the double bottom. And you have a very big bear bar. And let's say you're an experienced trader and you sold this close. Most traders would not do that. They would wait for one more bear close, which did not happen. We have a bull close on this bar. You never got the bear close. If you decided once you took this sell and then you saw this bull close that, oops, you made a mistake, you simply get out. You can get out on the close of this bar or above its high. Look at the open of this bar and the close of this bar. What do you know? The open of this bar is above the close of this bar. And that tells you that a lot of the bears who sold here did not like the bull close. And as soon as they saw this bar close with the bull body, they hit by the market to get out as soon as they saw this bull close. And there were so many traders buying the close of this bull bar. The open of this bar was above the close of this bar. That's a warning that a lot of traders were buying. A lot of them were bears deciding it was a bad trade. And here's where the final bears gave up. The bears who sold that close or sold below this double bottom are disappointed by the follow through bar. They want an immediate follow through. Look at the bulls who bought this close or that close. They have follow through and that increased the chances that they would get higher prices. Here, you have a bear breakout, but a reversal bar, a bull bar for the follow through. Bad follow through makes it unlikely that it's going to go much lower. If you sold that close and you were disappointed by this bull bar, you might place a limit order to get out break even. To get out, you need the market to trade back below that close. And look at the low of this bar. It did not get below that bear close. And therefore, if you had an order to get out break even, you would not have been filled. Some traders instead would place the order to get out just a little bit above that close, thinking that there may be so many traders trying to buy that close. It may not get to that close. It has to go below this close to get filled. Those traders were able to get out. The ones who tried to get out with zero loss, who tried to get out with a limit order at this close, were trapped. And you can see what happened. They bought back their shorts here. They were giving up. The bulls saw that the bears were trapped and they were ready to buy as well. An experienced trader, if he could not get out, he's going to get out maybe at the close of this bar or on the stop above that bull bar. And he'll get out here with a small loss. And that will allow him to start doing the right thing and buy and make a lot more profit than what he lost when he managed his trade correctly by getting out quickly. He took a bad entry. If he gets out quickly, he's fine. He can take buys and more than make up for the loss. For example, he could wait for two big bull bars closing on their highs. Now there's a high probability the market's going up for at least a measured move based upon the open of this bar to the close of that bar. Maybe 70% chance will go up. A reasonable by the close situation or by the close of any of these bars. Even this bear bar, the odds are after this much of a reversal, we're going at least a little higher. We have a double bottom. We went up. We're trying to go up again. Can you buy above this bar? Hoping for a double bottom. It's also a high two, high one, pullback high two. We have a reversal bar. The close of this bar is above the middle, so it's a reversal bar. But it has a bear body. It's also following a lot of bars without a bull body and is following a big bear breakout. This is a big bear breakout bar and a follow through bar. The odds are we're going at least a little lower. This is a bad buy. If you take this as a high two and a double bottom, it's a low probability bet after this many bars without a bull body. The trader's equation is bad. The probability of making money is probably 30% or less. This is a strong enough breakout to have a 70% chance of at least lower prices. You're taking a buy that is probably a minor reversal, a very tight bear channel, unlikely to lead to a major reversal. And therefore, a minor reversal means profit potential is small. You're taking a low probability buy with very little reward and relatively big risk compared to the reward. So bad risk reward and bad probability, that tells you this is a bad buy. In fact, there probably are more sellers at the high of this bar than there are buyers. Beginners do this all the time. All they see is a high two and a double bottom. They're eager to trade. They take the buy. Beginners take a lot of bad trades. Trades where the trader's equation is bad. And it's usually better to do the exact opposite. Expert traders see this breakout and this reversal down and they're eager to sell. When they see this bear bar, they know the odds of a reversal up are small. They're selling with a limit order above the high of this bear bar or with a stop below the low of this bear bar, expecting a trend down. In this particular case, the probability and the risk reward are bad. And therefore, taking this bet is the wrong thing to do. You should be doing the exact opposite. It's a bad trade, but beginners do that all the time. Whenever you take any trade, if the probability is especially low or the risk reward is especially bad, it's very difficult to make money. Beginners tend to focus only on risk because they're afraid of losing their account, which would mean the death of their dream as a trader. So they focus on risk. They therefore like to trade trades that have very low risk. If they're taking a trade with very low risk, they tend to go for quick profits as well. As soon as they get any profit, they're happy. And that means they tend to scalp. However, you're going for a small reward relative to risk. Let's say your reward is only one times your risk. Even if you win 60% of the time, you're going to lose money. If you're going for a reward where the risk is slightly greater than your reward, you have to win 70% or 80% of the time to break even and close to 90% of the time to consistently make money. That's just not going to happen if you're a beginner. If you're a beginner, you'll be happy to win 40% of the time. And this is a mistake the beginners make all the time. They just focus on risk and they want small profit. Any profit will make them happy. By doing that, it's a horrible traders equation and they're going to lose money. Yes, they will not lose much money on any one trade. But if you do it three or four times a day, you start to lose money pretty quickly. It adds up to a lot. Whenever the risk on any trade is greater than the reward, 60% probability is just not enough to have a good traders equation. You have to be winning 70, 80, 90% of the time. And you have to manage all those trades very, very well. And that's simply impossible for a person starting out. Therefore, beginners should not scalp. Think about this. If you have a low risk trade, then you have a very good risk reward situation. Low risk means good risk reward. However, there always has to be reason for an institution to take the opposite side of your trade. If you have fantastic risk reward, that institution has fantastic probability. In other words, he has a high probability of winning if you have great risk reward. If he has a high probability of winning, you have a low probability of winning. That means you're probably going to lose. If you're buying in a tight bear channel with no bull bars, it's a very low probability trade. And it's a line of reversal, which means it's either a bear flag or it's part of a trading range. Your reward is going to be low. Therefore, if you're looking to trade, you can only look to sell. You cannot be looking to buy when the trade you're considering has low reward. In other words, bad risk reward and low probability. It's better to do the opposite. It's a bad trade. You have a reversal bar, but it's a bear body and it's following a big bear bar. You have eight bars without a bull body, so there's no buying pressure. You have a tight bear channel, so the only reversal you'll get is minor, which means a small reward. And that bear body, even though it's a reversal bar, it's a bear body after a bear breakout. And therefore, it confirms the breakout and it means there's a 70% chance we're going at least a little bit lower. And you're buying. You cannot do that. An experienced trader will do the opposite. He'll say, wow, that's a good breakout, a bear body for follow through, decent follow through. It should go down. I'm going to sell with a limit order above the height of that bar. And that's exactly where you're looking to buy. The expert trader is doing the opposite. In addition to taking bad trades, beginners manage their trades badly. For example, he'll buy here and he'll think, oh, if I scale in and buy more lower, I increase my probability of success. And that is true. But you also increase your risk. And you're buying in a very tight bear channel, probably a small pullback bear trend. The chance of making money buying for any reason, even if you add on, is horrible. The beginner buys here. He hears somebody on television say, buy, buy, buy. Did you buy more lower? Terrible idea. He buys more here. His position size is too big. He cannot handle the appropriate stop. That would allow him to sit through the sell off and get out, break even on the reversal. And he ends up losing a lot more money than he should ever lose. Scaling into a trade makes sense if the trade is good to start with. And if you can manage correctly, for example, use a wide stop and scale inappropriately. It's a disastrous idea. If you cannot use a wide enough stop, if you cannot take the appropriate additional positions, if you cannot add on at the right time, if you do add on at the wrong time, and if you're taking a bad trade, if you're buying in a very strong bear trend, a small pullback bear trend. The beginner who buys here buys more here thinking he's trading like a professional. Eventually he gives up and takes a loss here. The loss on the combined position is far greater than he ever wants to take on any trade. His account is too small to add on. His stop is too far for a double position size. And he ends up losing four or five times more than his average win. That means he has to win five trades over the next week or so to make up for this one mistake. A terrible thing, but beginners do that regularly. Another mistake that beginners often make is they see the trend, they know it's going down, and they want to get short. What they'll often do is wait for a very strong bar, a very big trend bar, believing that the momentum will result in follow through and you can make money. In other words, he's entering late in a trend once the trend has become climactic. Here's the open of the session. We've got a couple of big tails on the bottoms of the bars, a bull bar closing on its high, a small bar, and now a big bar. The market looks like it's accelerating up. Let's say the beginner buys this close, hoping for a buy the close rally, which it could be. It's reasonable to do. However, he'd have to be disappointed by this bear bar, and he has to understand what took the place right here. If he does not understand, he's in big trouble. Bulls have bought this close, disappointed by this bear bar, trying to get out break even, placed a limit order to get out at that close, or they placed a limit order a little bit below it. And you can see what happened when this bar got near that close. It sold off. And this is caused by a lot of bulls deciding this was a bad buy. This bar tried again to get above that close. It could not even get above this high. That shows you that the bulls who did not get out here, lowered their limit order to take an even bigger loss. And a lot of them did not get filled here. The market's going down, and ultimately the bulls give up. Alternatively, a trader who watched the small pullback bear trend, and then get the wedge bear flag, three pushes up, one pause, two pause, three. And he's got a sell off here. And now the market is accelerating downward. He thinks it's going to be a new stronger leg down. He doesn't realize that this could be the final bear flag, and this could be a climactic end of the trend. So he waits the entire time, doesn't take any of the trades that were there. And now when the market's starting to accelerate down, he's finally deciding that he's going to sell. He has to be disappointed by the bull bar, and then several bull bars. An experienced trader who took that sell would say, huh, that's not good. I better try to get out break even. I'm going to place a limit order to buy back at my original price, and he gets filled here. The beginner does not. He ends up getting out here or up here. He was waiting to sell, and he ends up selling way too late in the trend when it's at a sell climax. He was waiting to buy. He bought too late at a buy climax. Selling down here, what do you think about the trader's equation? The stop is up here, so now the risk is great. Probably not much profit left in this lag. And the probability after a climactic breakout late in a trend after a possible final flag, the probability is not all that high either. The math is actually better to bet on the opposite. You're taking a low probability sell where the risk is big and the reward is small. It makes more sense to be doing the opposite. As a beginner, you cannot do the opposite, but an experienced trader might do that. He might place with a limit order to buy at that close, get filled here, or buy on the reversal up. Or at this point, a potential high or low major trend reversal. Bear trend, double bottom, reasonable buying pressure on this minor reversal. Maybe the next reversal will be major, so the bull will buy above that bar. Beginners want low risk, and they also want very high probability, and they equate momentum with probability. Bull bars, good momentum, maybe high probability. It can be high probability. Bear bars, good momentum, maybe high probability. It can be, but not this late in the trend. It's high probability here, and maybe here, but when you get this much strength late in a trend, 20 or more bars into the trend, it's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend, and the trend is probably transitioning to a trading range. Beginners, all they see is this bar. They just only see the bar that just closed, and maybe the bar in front of it, and they'll say, wow, bear trend, two big bear bars, it has to go down. He's not thinking about that it could be a climactic end of the trend. All he's looking at is these two bars. He's not looking at this, and he has to. He has to look at everything. He's thinking, well, the institutions aren't going to take my money. I have enough momentum down. Surely they'll give me at least a little bit of money. They don't care. They don't even know you exist. They don't care that you exist. You don't have enough money for them to take. They're not going to waste their time taking money from you. Goldman Sachs wants to take money from Morgan Stanley or from Bank of America or from some Japanese bank. Your money is just too small, so nobody cares about what you're doing. And they certainly don't care about helping you. Nobody cares. You're invisible when you trade, and that's how you should think about it. Nobody knows what you're doing. Nobody cares what you're doing. Nobody's trying to take your money, and nobody's trying to help you. Another mistake that the beginners do is instead of a mistake of commission, doing something bad, it's a mistake of omission, not doing what he needs to do. Let's say this beginner buys the high two. One, two, and a double bottom. He knows the probability is low. He's got eight bear bars, and he's got a bear sell signal bar, and no bull bar for eight bars, and an obvious bear trend. We have a micro double top. We went up on this bar, down, and up on this bar, and we have a bear bar closing on its low. He knows he should get out below this bear bar or below this bull bar for the micro double top. He knows that's the right thing to do, but he does not exit. He does not want to take the loss because he doesn't want to feel like a loser. He wants to win a high percentage of the time, and he's taking a chance. Well, maybe it'll go down a little bit and then come my way, and maybe I can get out break even. He knows that's the wrong thing to do, but he just can't do it. He cannot take the loss. He doesn't put a stop in the market. He keeps the stop in his head, so he does not have a stop down here. Stops are to protect you against you. They're not to protect you against the market. And a lot of times the beginner will decide, well, maybe this time I'll cancel my stop and just try to work my way onto the trade the way experts do. That's not what experts do. When they do something stupid, they take the loss. Sometimes a beginner will take a great trade and lose money because he manages it badly. For example, we have a bear breakout, good follow through, eight consecutive bear bars. It's reasonable to sell the close expecting at least a small second leg down and maybe a spike pullback channel down. He knows the appropriate stop is either above the top of this bear leg or above the top of the entire bear trend. If he's taking this trade, he's selling low in a bear trend. He has to use a wide stop because one of two things will happen. Either the market will go down and he'll make money or the market will go up and it'll be a trading range. And if he manages his trade well, he'll avoid a loss because he knows the market will come back and let him out break even. The stop is wide. If it's, let's say, three times bigger than what he usually uses, he has to trade. One third is normal position size. If he cannot reduce his position size, he cannot take the trade. He just has to wait for a trade that he can trade. The beginners tend to think about risk and they know the stop is much further away than what they typically use and therefore he's afraid. He ignores the other parts of the trader's equation. Reward and probability. The probability is high that he's going to make money. Probably some kind of a measure to move down. That means the probability is high that he'll probably make a lot of money. But it requires him to use the appropriate stop. One thing a beginner can do is take the trade, use the appropriate stop, and then go for a walk and come back in a half hour or an hour and see what the market is doing. And if he does that, he'll discover that it's actually a pretty profitable strategy. You always have to use a reasonable stop and that means a stop that's not too tight. And you have to trade small enough so that if your stop is hit, your loss is no bigger than on any other trade. Beginners get so anxious when they're in a trade that they're looking for any reason to get out. It's painful, emotionally painful. In this particular case, he sold his close and now he's thinking, uh oh, maybe it's a high two buy. Maybe it's a double bottom. We have a bull bar closing on its high. Maybe this is a reversal up. And he ends up buying back his short above the high of this bear bar, exactly where strong bears are selling, or above the high of this bull bar for a small loss. He's got a great short. His idea was right, but he did not manage it correctly. He could not handle losing that much money if the trade were to go against him. You cannot take the trade unless you can manage it appropriately. If the stop is too far, you cannot take the trade. Decide before you sell that the stop is too far. Don't decide after you sell. In this video, I talked about a very common cause of loss, and that's bad management. Management can come from taking bad trades. It can come from using inappropriate stops. It can come from scaling in inappropriately. It can come from trading too big a position. It can come from scaling in to too big a position with too much risk. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on losing because of mistakes.