 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the second of four videos on major trend reversals. I'll be talking about what constitutes a successful lower high major trend reversal. Here we have the end of a bull trend. I don't show the bars to the left. And we're starting to sell off. We try to rally here. Not enough bars for a major reversal, probably a minor reversal, and possibly a bull flag on a higher time frame chart. Although you don't see the bars to the left, there's a bull trend. And then we start to reverse down for 20, 30 bars. And then the bull trend resumes. This is a test of the old bull trend high. And it failed. It stopped at the prior minor lower high. We have a double top, and this high is below that high. So it's a double top lower high. Major trend reversal. Traders will sell this, or they'll sell below this small double top here, or the second entry short below this little bear bar here, taking a chance that the market will have a swing down. In this particular case, you could also call it a triangle. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Even at this point, it's still potentially a bull trend. We might get bull trend resumption. So bull trend trading range. Once the trading range lasts 20 or 30 bars, there's both a bull setup and a bear setup. 50% chance you'll get trend resumption up. 50% chance you'll get a trend reversal down. It wasn't until here that traders concluded the bull trend had ended and the bear trend began. Two or more bear bars closing near their lows. The market now is clearly always in short, and the odds are we're going lower. Now the market's forming lower highs and lower lows. It's in a bear trend. Bears will sell rallies. Every time the bulls try to do something strong, the bears will sell, betting that the reversals will fail. They'll sell. They'll sell. They'll sell. They'll sell. Double top bear flag. Low two short. Low one, low two. Small double top bear flag here. They'll sell below that bull bar, or better, below that bear bar. A one bar pullback after a surprisingly big breakout. Traders will sell. They'll low one short, below that bar, and get filled here. Or they'll sell below the bear bar, and get filled here. Low two short. One leg up, try to reverse down. Low one. A second leg up, a second reversal down, a low two. And now we even have a third. A low three, or a wedge. Traders will sell below the bear bar, betting on trend resumption, and betting against a trend reversal. Traders will enter with a stop right below the low of the prior bar for all of these. They see this bar, potential sell signal bar. They'll place a stop to go short just below its low, and they'll get short on this bar, the entry bar. Again, we had a bull trend, and then a sell-off. The rally lasted only about four bars from this low. Can this be a major trend reversal? Not likely. Major means big, and a pattern that only has four bars in one of the legs is not major, it's minor. It either leads to a trading range, or, in this case, since we're in a bull trend, a bigger bull flag. This is a 60-minute chart of the euro versus the dollar, and we have a bull trend. We have a trading range, a double bottom bull flag, and then a bull breakout. And then we reverse down. This is a potential higher high major trend reversal. We have a high, and we have a higher high. The sell-off lasted seven or eight bars, and went sideways for 20 bars. That's enough bars for a major reversal. And then we had a strong breakout that immediately failed. The market turned down fairly strongly. When you have a higher high major trend reversal, you're expecting at least a couple legs down. One pull back two. Here we got many legs down. And therefore, after the first leg, you get trend resumption back up. You expect it to fail, and form a lower high major trend reversal that leads to at least one more leg down. We have a big bear reversal bar reversing this. This might be a bear bar here, so this could be the second, third, fourth bear bar. At some point, traders are going to conclude that this is going to be a major reversal, and not just a minor reversal into a trading range. And that took place here. A big bear bar closing below the lows of the past 20 or 30 bars, and also the sixth consecutive bear bar. And the context is good. A potential higher high major trend reversal. A wedge. One, two, three. Traders believe at this point that the market is going lower, at least for one more leg. This is a give up bar. The bulls are giving up. And the market is now always in short. A bear trend. Another, even bigger give up bar. We fell below the bottom of the most recent bull rally. Very strong leg up. The bulls are hoping that, as long as it stays above this low, maybe the pullback will result in a trading range, and then a resumption of the bull trend. Once it fell below the bottom of this very strong bull breakout, most traders gave up. And here, you can see a very big bear bar closing below that low. And closing below the lows of the past 50, 60, 70 bars. The bulls are giving up. Strong enough bar. Big enough surprise. At least one more leg down. So pull back, and at least one more leg down. We have a couple lows. Three lows here. You can create a channel line, and then create a parallel. Drag it up to this high. And you have the earliest way to draw a channel. And you watch what happens when the market gets up to that line. And it's failing. Turning down strongly here. So now we're probably in a bear channel. A series of lower highs and lower lows. The bears will bet that every one of these reversals up will fail and become bear flags. Even one like this, with a lot of bars in it. Where are the consecutive big bull trend bars? Where are bull bars big like this? And like this? The bulls are not doing enough yet to reverse the bear trend. All of these reversals are probably minor and become bear flags. Every time there's a rally, traders assume it'll be a minor reversal. Traders will look to sell right below the low of the prior bar. We have a bear bar. Traders will sell one pip below its low. We have a low one short. They'll sell below that bar. And here we have even a better looking bear bar. And it's a second attempt by the bulls to reverse the trend. So the second time the bulls are reversing the trend and failing, bulls give up. That's one of the reasons why low twos and bear trends are so reliable. High probability trades. The bulls twice try to reverse. They fail twice. They give up. Here we have a micro double top and a double top with this high. Slightly higher double top, but it's still a double top. Traders will sell below the low of that bar or below the low of this bar and get filled here. Again, the bulls trying to reverse up. But, III, III, three inside bars. Traders will bet the bull reversal will fail and they'll look to sell below the low of the prior bar and they'll get filled here. The bulls broke to the upside, but not enough bulls buying. Too many bears selling above the III. The market reversed down. Sideways, a small double top bear flag. Traders will sell below the low of the prior bar. Below the low of the prior bar. They'll sell. Small double top bear flag near the top of the channel. And the same right here. A small double top. Not quite to the channel, but traders will sell every reversal down. They'll sell below this bar, below that bar, below this bar. And they get filled as this bar fell below that small bar's low. When you have a major trend reversal setup, there's a 40% chance of a swing profit. 40% chance of a move that's big enough for a swing profit. However, once there's a big breakout like this, there's a 60% chance that you'll make some kind of a profit. Usually based upon a measured move. For example, the open of the first bar of the breakout. The close of the final bar of the breakout. And a measured move down. The probability is higher, shorting after you see the breakout. Here, the probability of a swing down is lower. But the risk is less. You sell below this bar, below that bar. Stop above here, stop above here. You're not risking much. However, the reward is huge compared to the risk. And you can make money even if you win only 40% of the time. After the breakout, you sell this close for example. You sell below here. Your stop is up here or here. The risk is greater. However, the probability of making money is higher. And that high probability more than offsets the risk. Selling before there's an obvious breakout. And before the market is clearly always in short. Lower probability of a swing profit. Yet small risk. Most major trend reversals have only a 40% probability of a swing trade. Because you're entering before there's a strong breakout. And the market clearly has reversed. Entering after the breakout. Selling closes. Selling below bars. Selling below bars. The market clearly is now bearish. The odds are high. There'll be at least a small second leg down. Here there's a big second leg down. Higher probability of profit. Measured move down. Maybe from the top of the trend. We got a little bit of overlap. This bar pulled back a little bit above that breakout point. It's a negative gap. Still, you have to be thinking about a potential measured move. And we fell for more than a measured move. You could have used this high for the measured move. So this high to this gap. And it would have been here. You can see some bears took profits there. Or you could use the entire top of the bear trend. If it falls below the first target, you have to look at other targets. It fell below the second target as well, using the top of the bull trend and the gap. If you take this short, a double top bear flag. Breakout test of this breakout point. Very strong bear breakout. This is testing the breakout point. And the trend is resuming. If you take this short stop, probably up here. Because there might be one more leg up before there is a resumption of the trend down. The euro versus the dollar. We have a bull trend. Sideways for 20 bars. That's enough selling pressure so that the next rally up might be the final rally. It might be a higher high. And it might lead to a major reversal. Traders who take the early sell before there is a strong bear breakout. Have very little risk. They sell below the low of this bar. They get filled here. Their stop is here. Before the trend is clearly bearish. You might only have a 40% chance of a swing profit. Two legs down. A reward at least twice as big as the risk. However, your risk is small. If you get a swing profit, 40% of the time, it's a profitable strategy to take shorts like that. Most major trend reversals have only a 40% chance of a swing trade. The other 60% small wins, small losses that offset one another. What you're looking for when you're taking a major trend reversal trade is the 40% of the time when you get a big move. More than double the risk that you take when you take the short. That huge reward relative to the risk greatly offsets the low probability. The 40% probability. If you want a higher probability trade, you wait until there is a clear bear breakout. Here, we have a second leg down. A very big bear breakout. Closing below the bottom of the most recent. Very strong bull leg. This is a major higher low. And we're closing below that major higher low. This is probably going to be a measuring gap, leading to some kind of a measured move down. Higher probability shorting here, or here, or here. If you short here, your stop is up here. Your risk is greater. But your probability is greater as well. You're taking a high probability trade. Usually comes with worse risk reward. Here you're taking a low probability trade. Usually comes with very good risk reward. Small risk, big reward. It's acceptable to take either trade. The initial one with the low risk and low probability, or the later ones here, or here, or here, or here, or here. Much higher probability of a profit. But the stop is usually further away. If you sell down here, your stop is above the most recent major lower high. It's a major lower high because it had a strong bear breakout to a new significant low. Minimum initial target when you have a strong breakout like that. The open of the first bar of the breakout to the close of the final bar of the breakout. Here it's a one bar breakout. That would be the initial minimum target. And you can see there was some profit taking there. We have a breakout below this low, and a pullback. It could not go above that low. So maybe this is a measuring gap. Which means you look at the start of the move, and then the middle of the gap, or simply just this low, and project down for a measured move. And there probably will be profit taking there. And it's a reasonable place to take partial profits if your profits are twice your actual risk. If you sold here, your actual risk was only to like right here. It's tiny. So two times risk is here. That is too small a reward for a pattern this big. So I would not exit a two times actual risk. I would look for other targets like here. And you can see that a lot of traders started taking profits here. You can see the market starting to go sideways around these measured move targets. Traders are taking profits. The bulls could not reverse the market. So the bears sold again. If you take any of these shorts, selling that close, selling below this bar. Selling the low too short, below this bar. Micro double top. Breakout test. Testing this breakout point. Take any of these shorts. Your top is above the most recent major lower high. A breakout to a new low. Strong breakout. It's a major lower high. A major trend reversal. It's probably the best setup for beginners. And it's also a great setup for experts as well. Time is on your side. You usually can anticipate the reversal before it takes place. It gives you time to decide whether or not to take the trade. We have a bull trend. And the market is going sideways for a lot of bars. Maybe this could be the final bull flag. Also it's the third push up. One, two, three. So it's also a wedge top in addition to a final flag top. Traders will anticipate that and they'll look to sell a reversal down. Here, a lower high after a very strong breakout. Odds are we're going lower. When you see this bear breakout, traders are looking for a rally, expecting it to be a failed reversal, become a bear flag, and they're looking to sell below the low of the prior bar. Especially selling below the low of a bear bar. Getting filled here. Getting filled here. Getting filled here. Or getting filled here. The management is usually easier than for other trades as well. It's a swing trade, so you're making fewer decisions. You simply rely on your stop. If you sell here, your stop is above the most recent major lower high. And you just stay in the trade until the trade clearly reverses, or until the end of the session, or until your reward is at least two times your risk, or you're down at some kind of a measured move target. Then you take partial profits. Excellent traders equation, because the reward potential is at least twice as big as your risk. And these setups are frequent. Usually there's at least one a day if you're day trading. This is a 60 minute chart, and this is toward the end of a session during that day. So it's reasonable to take profits here. Trying to reverse up. Also your reward at this point is five times your initial risk. You know, three, four, five times your initial risk. 10 or 20 times your actual risk. If you sold that close, your actual risk was just one pip above this bar. And this reward is five or ten times bigger than that risk, which is fantastic. At some point you have to look to take partial profits. This is a 60 minute chart. The market has had consecutive sell climaxes. We're at the bottom of a channel. I do not have the channel line drawn in. But you have a bull reversal bar. This is a logical location to take profits. If this was a five minute chart, and this was the end of the session, exiting above that bull bar would make sense. I said that major trend reversals have a 40% chance of success. That means that 60% of the time they don't work. However, a lot of times you'll get multiple setups. Bull trend, bear break. Here's the bull trend line. Bear break below the bull trend. Traders will look to sell a reversal. Five consecutive bull bars, not a good candidate for a major trend reversal. But now we have a bear inside bar, a second entry short. This would be a higher probability short. It didn't work. We kept going up. However, now we still have a lower high. This time it's a double top lower high compared to the top of the bull trend. And we tried to break to the upside and we're reversing down. So a micro double top and a double top. Traders will sell below that bear bar. That's another attempt at selling a major trend reversal. And we kept going up again. This short failed. The bears that took that short probably would get out here. You can see we raced up here. A lot of the bears gave up here around their original entry price. Maybe they had a break even stop. Yet, we have a reversal attempt and a second reversal attempt. A wedge, one, two, three. And a bigger wedge, one, two, three. And this high is slightly below this high, still reversing down again. It's another attempt at a lower high major trend reversal. This one led to a good swing trade. First leg and maybe second leg. Maybe second leg get out here. Maybe you keep holding. The probability of a swing trade, even with a good setup, only about 40%. 60% of the time, you get small losers or small winners. And they offset one another. But 40% of the time, you get a reward more than twice your actual risk. Here, the reward is many times bigger than the actual risk. If you sell below the low of this bar, you get filled here. Your stop is here. Very small initial risk. Your actual risk here, if you sold below this bar, is very little. And the profit was many, many times greater than the actual risk. Very good math. If you take this short, you might get out above this big bull bar. A reversal and a higher low. If you took this short, you might get out here. Maybe we're in a trading range and it's a second reversal up. If you don't get out here, you get out here above this bar. Or you can see a lot of bears gave up here. And they get out around break even. If a trader exited, let's say a trader exited above this high. We have a bear breakout. So this is a major lower high. We broke above it. But it's still a possible double top bear flag. And then we have a very good bear bar. A lot of the bears would sell again below that bar. And they'll sell again here as well. We have a double top. Trying to reverse down. We're pulling back from the breakout below the double top. Here's the breakout below this double top. And this is a pullback short below that bear bar. And they'll sell here. If you're in a swing trade and you get out for any reason, but the premise appears to be still valid, look to sell again here or here. It's sometimes difficult to stay in a trade. For example, here we're breaking above a major lower high. But this little breakout without follow through is not enough to convince traders that the bear trend has ended and a bull trend has begun. The bear trend ended and now we're in a trading range, but we're reversing down from the top of a potential trading range. And this might get trend resumption from the initial leg down. Lower high, major trend reversal. Bull trend, very strong breakout. The bull trend tried to resume, but it's failing at a lower high. So it's a lower high, major trend reversal. And a second entry short. First here, and then here. If you sell below this bar, maybe you put your stop above this bear bar. Maybe above here. That's your initial risk, just above this bar. One times initial risk, two times initial risk. A lot of traders like to exit half of their position at two times initial risk. So a lot of the bears who sold here would take partial profits here. And look what happened. The market reversed up. That tells you that a lot of traders were looking to take partial profits at two times the initial risk. A lot of traders will take entire profits until the trend is clearly bearish. Because of the possibility that instead of a reversal into a bear trend, it might simply be reversal into a bear leg in a trading range. So it's reasonable to exit everything right here. If a trader only took half off here, and they see this very strong reversal up, a lot of traders will exit above. They're concerned that this is a bull trend, a wedge bull flag. One push down, two pushes down, three pushes down. A breakout of the bull flag, and this is maybe simply a pullback from that breakout. So many traders would exit here, and you can see a lot of the bears gave up. That caused this big bull bar. You can either sell here or sell here. A reasonable short, a nested wedge. Again, if you exited above this major lower high, you can sell again here, and then you can sell again here. If there's a new signal, just sell again. End of the session. Take profits. I talked about the components of a successful major trend reversal. For example, a lower high major trend reversal. You have a bull trend. You have a break below the bull trend line, a minor reversal into a bull flag. The bull trend tries to resume, but then it fails just below the high of the bull trend. You get a lower high reversal. If it reversed down above the high, it would be a higher high major trend reversal. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on major trend reversals. If she emphasized this high for ...cu point of trading, it's wide open fork BLWids. But it asks the bug to take him and bring a huge boost. First, you can't lose your brain to lose his mind. That's a long timeulu or a bettergens nimme. Star, often,