 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of six videos on channels. I'm going to begin by talking about how often new trends begin while an old trend is still in effect. I'll then move on to talk about trends and higher timeframes. And finally, I'll talk about reversals and breakouts. I want to make an important point here, and it's, I think, something that traders often overlook. Traders think that a bull trend like this can suddenly become a bear trend. There's actually a transition that takes place, and very often the bear trend starts before the bull trend has ended. For example, we have a pullback. We have another pullback. It's forming a higher low inside a bull channel. However, the last higher low in a bull channel can, in fact, be the start of the bear trend. So, yes, it's still a bull trend. We're still going higher. However, this bear trend, this pullback, actually began probably right here, at least in the minds of a lot of traders and in the algorithms of a lot of computers. It doesn't matter that the bull trend extended beyond the high at this point. This is the transition. We have a bull trend. And at this point, although at this moment you don't know it, the bear trend is actually started. Once the bear trend begins somewhere in here, you're going to conclude that, hmm, maybe this pullback was, in fact, the start of the bear trend, even though the bull trend was still in effect. Remember, a bull trend usually transitions into a bear trend. It doesn't immediately reverse into a bear trend. And often the final pullback in a bull trend is, in fact, the first pullback in a bear trend. For the bears, they see this as a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down. One, two, three. It does not matter that the high of the bull trend came after the start of the bear trend. At this point, we have a bull trend and the beginning of a bear trend. You did not know it here. But after this and after that, you look back to the left and say, where did the bear trend begin? It probably began right here, even though the bull trend was still in effect. This is very common, and probably 50% of wedge bull flags have a high following the beginning of the pullback. Three legs down. One, two, three. And it's pretty good selling pressure. A lot of bear bars. When you have a wedge bull flag like this with pretty good selling pressure, it often becomes the final bull flag in the bull trend. In other words, you get a bull breakout, but the bull breakout might be the final leg up before the bull trend transitions into a trading range. Again, the bull trend ended here, but the bear trend began here. A bear channel. In this case, it's a wedge bull flag, but it's still a bear trend. The opposite is true when you have a bull channel. Here we have a bear trend, and we have a pullback, and then we have a resumption of the bear trend. However, where did the wedge bear flag begin? Did it begin right here? Is it a low two short, two legs up, one pullback two, a double top one two? Or in fact, did the bull trend, the small bull trend, the bear flag begin right here before the bear trend ended? I think, at least in my mind, and I think in the minds of a lot of traders and in the algorithms of a lot of computers, this is the start of the pullback. Even though the bear trend had not yet ended. Again, a bear trend often transitions into a bull trend before the bear trend ends. Very often, the final pullback in a bear trend is the first leg up in a bull trend. Wedge bear flag, three pushes up, one, two, three. Even though that first leg up occurred before the bear trend ended. Also, you have a double top, a bull breakout. Whenever you have a double top and a bull breakout that reverses, that is the type of wedge. You have three pushes up, one, two for the double top. And then the breakout is the third push. So the reversal is the start of a wedge bear flag. So three pushes up, a wedge bear flag, a double top, a failed bull breakout. That is a variation of a wedge. And again, the wedge began before the bear trend ended. Probably half of the time that is the case. Three pushes up, so pretty good buying pressure. And whenever you have pretty good buying pressure in a wedge bear flag, late in a bear trend, it often becomes the final bear flag before you get a bigger reversal. Here we have a wedge bottom after that wedge bear flag. And this led to a double bottom or slightly lower low major trend reversal. Again, a wedge late in a bear trend often becomes the final bear flag before there is a major reversal. We have a bear channel, lower lows, lower highs. However, the final lower high in a bear channel can be the first high in a bull trend. So the bull trend can start before the bear trend ends. Here we have a lower high. Did not go to a new low. And it was the last lower high of the bear trend. It was followed by a higher low in this case, and the start of a bull trend. Bear trend, lower high. And sometimes that lower high will be followed by a new low, and then a reversal up. And sometimes it's followed by a higher low in a move up. The first high in a bull trend often is the final high in a bear trend. We have a bull trend and a higher low. But that higher low in the bull trend was actually the first push down in a bear trend. We have a low, lower low, lower low. This low in the bull trend was followed by a rally, but it failed to get to a new high. Even if it went to a new high and turned down, it still could have been the first low in a bear trend. Look at the sell-off. Bear bar, bull bar. A couple small bear bars, bull bar. The bear trend is lacking consecutive big bear trend bars. Also, it's holding above the bottom of the bull leg. And the entire sell-off looks weaker than the two big bull bars that went up. This might be, in fact, a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down. One, two, three. And the odds are the bulls will get trend resumption up. A bear leg in a bull flag is more likely than the start of a bear trend. And you can see we've got a bull breakout and trend resumption up. So bull trend pull back into a bull flag and trend resumption up. Three pushes down. Bear trend. Strong bear breakout. Three pushes. One, two, three. Where did the bull channel begin? I always look to the left to see if there's a first leg up within the bear trend. And I draw lines connecting highs. Reversal down. So that's a possible first point of a line. Reversal down. Second point of the line. And while you can argue that it's two legs up from this low and the bull trend began here. Some computers instead will say the bull trend began here. And it's a wedge rally. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Even though the bear trend had not yet ended. The transition often means that you have a bear trend and the bull trend begins before the bear trend ends. We've got a high, but a lower high. The biggest bull bar late in the trend. Possibly an exhaustive bar. And a failed breakout above a bull channel. And we ended up with a lower high, a failed breakout, a biclimax, and a reversal down. Big up, big down. Big up, big down. We have a double top and a breakout. And it's a failed breakout above the double top. It actually extended up for about a measured move. But still a lower high. When I'm looking at this chart, I understand the argument that the bull trend began here. I would look at this chart and conclude that the bull trend began here, before the bear trend had ended. So the first rally was actually still part of the bear trend. And it's a transition from a bear trend to a bull trend. And in a transition, a lot of times there are components of both. At this point, for example, we're still in a bear trend. We still have lower highs. And we don't know until up here. We don't know that this in fact is part of the bull trend. And we don't know until we're up here that this might be in fact part of the bull trend as well. Even though it's still in the bear trend. The important point is that when a bear trend converts into a bull trend, often the beginning of the bull trend starts before the bear trend completely ends. It's part of the evolution of bear to bull. Again, when you're drawing lines, I'm always looking for reversals. We have a reversal down here, reversal down here, reversal down there. Or I can draw a line using that high or this high. And then this high or that high. We have two reversals down. So possibly the start of a bull trend. You can see the line is going up. Yet, this low is below that low. It does not matter that the bear trend had not yet finished. The bull trend might have begun before the bear trend has ended. And that's just part of the evolution of a bear trend into a bull trend. The early parts of the bull trend often form while the bear trend is still underway. You can see we have a lower low in the bear trend, but the bull trend probably began back here. Is this line important? Well, we don't know. Is this really the start of the bull trend? Well, it might be, but you need some validation of this line. What will happen if the market gets up to that line again? Alright, it reversed down. That tells you that the market considers this line important. Where did the line begin? It began over here while still in the bear trend. So this illustrates that computers and traders thought that the bull trend began here. This is where the line began, and it began before the bear trend had completed. And the trend line, one, two, three. So we get a wedge top and two legs down, one, pull back, two. Incidentally, whenever I see a wedge top, I'm expecting two legs sideways to down, not necessarily down. It does not have to be one, pull back, two. It can be one, pull back, two, mostly sideways. You never know in advance what the majority of computers will use as their lines. And there are many ways to draw lines. I can use that low and this low. Some computers will use that low. Other computers will use this low or that low. If I initially use this blue line, one, two, I see the market reversing up here at three. That tells me that the computers are probably not considering this as the start of the bear trend. We have the top of the bull trend and possibly the start of the bear trend, but the market did not reach that line. However, look at this line, 1A instead of one. Look at 1A and I connect it to two. Look what happened when the market got here. It reversed up here. It reversed up again here. Which point do you think is the start of the bear channel? This one? The market never got there. Or this red one? The market got here, reversed up, got here again and reversed up. This red line looks like it's more likely part of the bear channel. And I look to the left and I can see this is where it began. Yet, the bull trend was still going up. We still got a new high after the start of the bear channel. That is very common. Probably half of the time when you get a bear trend, it begins before the bull trend has ended. I want to talk a little bit about higher time frames. This is a 60 minute E-mini chart. And we have three pushes up. One, two, three. The spacing is not great. A lot of space between one and two. Much less space to bar three. But it's still three pushes up with reversals down. So effectively it's a type of a wedge even though it does not have a wedge shape. Could I also use this high? We got a reversal. This high, reversal. This high, reversal. This high, reversal. Sure. Some computers will be using that instead. One or one and then two and three. I always like to connect one and three. And I don't care if two is above that line. If I see a reversal down at a potential point three, I conclude that that is the correct line. And two is an overshoot. If you're a day trader trading on a five minute chart or a 15 minute chart, higher timeframe signals like on the 60 minute chart or the daily chart come much less often. But they still can be important. And if you look at a five minute chart, especially if you use a bar chart, which has a lot of bars on the chart, you can see the same lines. On the 60 minute chart, a lot of bare bars and some of them are pretty big. And here we have four consecutive bare bars, two consecutive big bare bars. So there's pretty good selling pressure. There are also usually other patterns within patterns. For example, we got a low, a lower low. We have a high, a higher high. It's a type of expanding triangle. The shape is not particularly good. That means that most computers will not be paying much attention to this as an expanding triangle. However, they are paying attention to the market reversing down at this line and that line. Top of the channel, we're getting a failed breakout attempt and a reversal down. Here we have a low one, low two. I also like to pay attention to consecutive tops, which is a variation of a low four pattern. So does the market try to top and then fail and then try to top again? For example, here at one, two, three, we tried to get a wedge top here, but we broke strongly above it. Strong enough up, so a second leg up is likely. And we got that here. So we got one, two, three, first top, and then two more legs up, second top. Consecutive tops. We tried to get a wedge top here. It failed. And then we got another couple of legs up and this double top succeeded. Even though it's a low five, one, two, three, and then four, five, it's still a variation of a low four. I prefer to use the term consecutive tops because a lot of times low fours can be consecutive wedges. So it could be a three and a three. It could be a two and a three. It could be like here, a three and then a two. The important point is the market tried to top, it failed. We got a couple more legs up and the second attempt at the top was successful. Higher probability sell when you get a second consecutive reversal pattern. Bears will sell expecting at least a couple legs down. One, pull back, two. They sell just below the low of that bar. Take a look at this. This is the same chart. The last chart was a 60 minute chart. This is a five minute chart and I compressed the bars so that it would look the same as that 60 minute chart. And these lines are the same. One, two, three, and then over here as well. You can compress the bars and put a whole bunch of bars on the chart and get the same shape as I just showed on that 60 minute chart. This is a close up of that five minute chart at the top. Traders could sell below that bar or we have now a double top. They can sell below that bare bar or below this bull reversal bar. It's a reversal bar with a bull body. Now why would anyone do that? They see the lines on the 60 minute chart. Why not just trade it on the 60 minute chart? A lot of traders will look for patterns on higher timeframe charts and then look for entries on lower timeframe charts because they usually can enter with less risk. The bars are smaller so the risk is smaller. On the five minute chart you would sell here or here. And that's actually three to four points better than taking the entry on the 60 minute chart. For example, if you enter on the 60 minute chart, your entry would have been here. If you see the lines on the 60 minute chart, you can turn to a five minute chart and look for a reversal on the five minute chart and often get in at a better price and with less risk. I'm going to talk a little bit more about reversals and breakouts. My 70% rule whenever the market is at a channel, the top or bottom of either a bull or a bear trend, there's about a 70% chance that the market will reverse. 0.1, 0.2, 70% chance you'll get a reversal at 0.3. 0.1, 0.2, 70% chance you'll get some kind of reversal at 0.3. This is a bull trend and this is a bear trend. It does not matter that this is the top of a bear trend and this is the top of a bull trend. 70% chance you're going to get some kind of a reversal, a tradable reversal. The same is true with the bottom of a channel. Here's the bottom of a bear channel. 70% chance 0.3 will reverse up. Here's the bottom of a bull channel. 70% chance 0.3 will reverse up. 0.1, 0.2, I draw a line. This is 0.3. This is a very strong breakout. We have a weak rally for a first leg up and then a very strong second leg up. If this is in a bear channel or in a trading range, you have to be thinking that it might be a second leg trap. So leg one pull back and then very strong leg two and attempt at a breakout and the conversion into a new market cycle. Breakout channel trading range. However, if the bars to the left are sideways and the market is now at the top of a trading range, or if this is a bear channel, this could simply be a second leg trap and lead to a reversal down. In any case, when you have a very strong rally like that, I'm not going to sell here. I need at least a second reversal, some kind of a double top. Whenever a setup is not strong, it's not strong to sell immediately after a strong bull breakout. It's better to wait for a second signal. And here we also have a good sell signal bar, just as we have here. This is a higher probability short than that. A great looking bear reversal bar usually is not enough to reverse a very strong bull trend. Usually you need to wait for a second signal. Usually this will be a minor reversal, which means a bull flag, and there'll be at least one more leg up before the bears can get a significant, tradable, profitable short. This is the short below the second attempt, a double top. I'm constantly drawing lines. After every failed breakout, I redraw the lines. We have a reversal down, reversal down, two points, I draw a line. We have a reversal up, reversal up, two points, I draw a line. But then I break strongly below the line. What do I do? I'm going to get rid of that line and draw a new line connecting this low and that low. The market's telling me it's ignoring this line. Well, what am I going to do? I'm going to ignore that line. Now we have a potential channel. And this line is close to parallel to this line. So I'm going to leave it there, even though the spacing might not be good between point one and point two, and then point two and point three. Very strong reversal up. But look what happened. We reversed down. So point one, point two, point three. Top of the channel. It didn't matter that this is very strongly up. It reversed down. When I see a big bear reversal bar after a breakout like this to a new high, I'm not going to short that after this much buying. However, I will look to short a second reversal down, either here or here below that bear bar. Reversing up. Well, you know what I'm going to do. I'm going to draw a new line. I could draw the line from this low to that low. I'm initially going to draw it from this low to that low. As trends mature, as more bars get added to the trend, the trend typically becomes weaker and it tends to evolve more into a trading range. By weaker, I mean flatter. I had one line here and now I have a flatter line. So the channel is becoming flatter, less strong. And also the channel tends to get broader. The space between the top line and the bottom line tends to get wider. And that is a sign that the market might be starting to transition into a trading range. And that's ultimately what we had. Double top, double bottom, another push way down here. So this looks like the bull trend has evolved into a trading range. Obviously a bull trend, different ways to draw it. Some computers will use this for 0.1. Others will use that. It doesn't matter. The lines are very close to the same place when the market ultimately reversed down. What's the target? I said 70% chance if the market tests the top of the channel, it's going to reverse to the bottom of the channel. Well, we have a bull trend. Where is the bottom of the channel? There are often many possibilities. An obvious one is this. We have a reversal up, a second reversal up. So that is a reasonable possible bottom of the channel, especially since it's fairly parallel with those two lines. What about a parallel of that blue line? The market doesn't appear to be paying much attention to that parallel. What about drawing a line connecting these two red lines? That yellow line is a parallel of this yellow line. But what about connecting these two red lines? Again, all of these lines are close together and the market's not reversing up strongly from either of those lines. Are there any other lines? Well, are there any other reversals? We got this low and that low. That allows for a line as well. However, the market fell strongly through it, so the computer is not listening to that line either. It's important to keep drawing lines and watch how the market reacts when it gets near a possible line. A possible bottom. You look for a strong reversal up. Or you look for a breakout to the downside. And if you get the downside breakout, you often get a couple legs down. I think this chart is particularly interesting. This is the S&P Cash Index, a monthly chart. And this is the 1987 crash. I began trading right before that crash. I'm sure very few of you were trading at that time. The news made it sound like it was recurrence of the 1929 crash and the start of a depression. But what happened? We got a micro double bottom and then a bull trend. Look what happened. We have a reversal up. We have a reversal up. Reversal up. You can draw a line. Even though this crash was huge at the time, the market fell 25% in one day. Where did it stop? At a trend line. I think it's really important to recognize that. Plus a micro double bottom. A lot of times when the market has a huge collapse and then a micro double bottom, it'll channel up. That's a very common pattern. Even though the crash looks like it's the start of a huge spike in channel bear trend. So spike, pull back and then maybe bear trend. We had that in 1929. We had a spike in channel bear trend. Here we have a spike and a micro double bottom at a bull trend line and the bull trend continued up. As disastrous as this looked at the time, it's really not a significant event in the big picture. For example, look at what took place since then. Here's that 1987 crash. As disastrous as it looked at the time, it looks like nothing today. We had a big reversal down here. Another big reversal down there. But we reversed up. We reversed up. I can draw lines. Look at this. The 2007, 2008, 2009 collapse. It ultimately reversed up. But where did it reverse up from? Connect these lows. And just like the 87 crash bottomed at a bull trend line. The 2009 crash reversed at a trend line. And that is an important reminder to keep drawing lines. Because every sell-off, no matter how strong, ultimately is going to reverse up. And it's always going to reverse up at a line. In this video, I talked about how new trends often begin before the prior trend has ended. There's a transition from one trend into another trend. And the beginning of the new trend often starts while the old trend is still in effect. Traders often find patterns on higher time frames and then switch to lower time frames to find earlier entries. And finally, I talked about reversals and breakouts. And in particular, every major reversal, like in the 1987 crash or the 2009 crash, comes at some kind of a trend line. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the third of six videos on channels. That's the third of six videos on channels.