 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of three videos on trading at the end of the day. When trading at the end of the day, traders should look for breakouts and trading ranges and, in general, not channels, which usually require limit orders. When trading at the end of the day, you're talking about the final hour, maybe the final 90 minutes, and you have very little time left to make money. The market at the end of the day is deciding if the price is too high, too low, or just about right for going into tomorrow. There's sometimes some new information about tomorrow that comes in at the end of the day and requires an adjustment of price before the close. The market is also a very important thing to see if the price is too low. Did the middle of the day go too far down, for example, as it did here? Will there be a reversal up at support, like at the low of the day? Will a bear trend resume? Let's say we have a bear trend here, pullback and trend resumption down. Will the market break out below major support? Here, we're at the bottom of a range. We have a double bottom and the bear has got a breakout. It's not important to know the reasons why the market is doing whatever it's doing. Do not turn the television to find out the news. Simply trade what the market is telling you to do. If it's going up, you look to buy. If it's going down, you look to sell. The only important point is can you structure a trade that has a reasonable chance of making money? You never need to know the reason why the market is doing what it's doing, especially at the end of the day when you really do not have enough time to consider the news and decide whether it's bullish or bearish. It's tough enough to do that at any time during the day, but at the end of the day, things happen fast and you have to make quick decisions. All I care about when I'm trading at the end of the day is whether or not the day is likely to be in a trend or in a trading range, and then I trade appropriately. Sometimes you'll get a trend in the middle of the day that lasts until the end of the day. Here we have a bear trend beginning in the middle of the day. We have a double top. And here we have a reversal day. It sold off for the first half and rallied for the second half. I talk about how to trade this kind of a situation in the videos on trading in the middle of the day. If you have a trend lasting to the end of the day, you trade it like a trend. There is no clear end to the day here. The market traded down in a channel starting in the middle of the day and there was no transition into some other type of trading at the end of the day. And here the same is true, but in the opposite direction. The market began to trend up in the middle of the day and there was no transition at the end of the day. So you keep trading the way you were trading from the middle of the day. What I want to talk about here are opportunities that come in the final 30 to 60 minutes and they happen just about every day. For example, the market's in a trading range and now we're getting a bear breakout. A pair of bear bars, one of them pretty good size, probably a sell the close finish. Here we have a reversal up in the final hour. We have a double bottom, a good bull bar and a series of bull bars. This is a buy the close finish. When I'm looking for trends at the end of the day, I prefer to find trends that are strong, like a buy the close market or a sell the close market. If I'm trading, my risk is determined by how far my stop is. However, there's an added risk at the end of the day, and that is time. Time becomes a risk factor. And that's why it's usually not good to be entering with limit orders, because in a limit order trade, you're betting against the current trend. You're betting on a reversal. That's fine if you have time to scale in, which would increase the probability that you would make a profit. However, you may not have enough time for the reversal to take place. And therefore, you run out of time and you find yourself scaling into an ever increasing losing position. And you end up with a big loss at the end of the day. Earlier in the day, you can scale in and use wide stops to increase the probability of making money. For example, you could be selling above highs and scaling in higher, knowing that there's a lot of time left for the market to come down to your original entry. You can get out break even there and with a profit on your higher entry. You cannot do that at the end of the day. For example, if you're starting to sell as this is going up, you'll run out of time and you'll end up with a big loss at the end of the day. Because of that time factor, scaling in and entering with limit orders betting on reversals is a risky way to trade. If the market's clearly in a trading range, you can do that. But in general, it's better either to be looking for a buy the market or sell the market trend, sell closes, buy closes, or looking for a pullback. For example, here, a pullback and a bull trend and you buy with a stock. If you're buying with a limit order as the market's going down, you're betting on a reversal. And if you're adding on, your risk is increasing and you're running out of time. And the opposite is true here. If you're selling with a limit order at the end of the day, you're betting on a reversal. Trends can last a lot longer than what you think is reasonable and you can quickly run out of time at the end of the day. At any time, there's either a trend or a trading range. Most traders prefer trend trading at the end of the day. Most traders prefer trend trading at any time during the day. The only decisions you have to make are management, where to take profits, where to put your stock. Trading range requires a lot more decisions. You're scalping repeatedly and that means at the end of the day, you're making a lot of decisions. You have to decide to enter, exit, enter, exit, how to enter, how to exit, where your stops are, where to exit. At the end of the day, you're tired and you're more prone to make mistakes. If you see the market going sideways in the final 30 minutes, chances are it's going to go sideways for the remainder of the day. Most traders should not trade. Computers don't get tired and therefore they don't care. They don't care about making repeated decisions and repeatedly scalping. But that's just not possible for most people because we do get tired. Here's a bull channel at the end of the day. It looks like a buy the close market here, which is good, but then you're getting repeated pullbacks and you're constantly wondering if the market's going to reverse. In general, when there is a channel and you're looking to buy, it's better to be entering with limit orders, buying below bars. But then you're betting that the reversal is going to be a bull flag and the bull trend is going to resume. And that is not as certain at the end of the day. And you do not have time to use a wide stop and scale in. If the channel starts with more than two hours left in the day, then it's a little bit easier to trade. It's a little bit more certain that it will last until the end of the day. If it begins later in the day, there's too much risk of it evolving into a trading range, especially if the pullbacks are deeper and more frequent. A tight bull channel like this, especially in a day that was a bull trend earlier, it's reasonable to buy and just hold. So it's trend resumption up, bull trend, trading range, and then trend resumption up. When you get a channel at the end of the day, for example, here in the final hour, there's a greater risk of it becoming a trading range and you end up buying too high and then not making money. Bull bar, bear bar, bull bar, bear bar, bull bar, doji, small bull bar, doji. This is dangerous. It's channeling up. But at any point it could convert into a trading range and you could end up having bought at the high of the channel at the end of the day. It's fine to buy and use wide stops if you have enough time, especially if you can scale in, but you do not have time at the end of the day. And the result is you're more likely to get a loss if you're buying in a bull channel or selling in a bear channel that's starting in the final hour. It's in pretty much a trading range and then it's starting to channel down at the end of the day. When it's in a channel, it's usually easier to make money with limit orders. When a channel begins in the final hour, it's more difficult to make money because at any time it could reverse or enter a trading range. When a channel starts with more than a couple hours left in the day, you can continue to trade it like a channel. For example, you could just sell and hold for a swing until the close or unless the market clearly reverses. Here at the end of the day, in the final hour, we're getting a reversal down in our tight channel. Do you want to be selling that? I would not. If a channel is beginning in the final hour, I would just let it go. It's just too easy to lose money, too much risk of it evolving into a trading range or reversing. If you're selling using wide stops, planning to scale in if it goes against you, you cannot do that because here it goes against you. It's just a few bars left in the day and it never goes back in your direction. So you end up scaling into a losing trade and you lose even more. A little bit of a buy the close bull trend. Four bars closing on their highs and then again more here. Traders can buy the market and decide whether to swing or scalp. Here we have a sell the close bear trend. After three or four bear bars, the odds are we're going lower. However, it's starting around 11 o'clock. You have two hours left in the day. It's probably not going to remain a sell the close bear trend until the end of the day. That means it's either going to convert into a trading range or into a broader channel. Whenever you see a sell the close trade like this here, five, six, seven bars, all bear bars, it's a sell the close bear trend. But it's starting with two hours left in the day. You have to assume it's not going to make it to the end of the day. It's either going to reverse or enter a trading range. You can see here it evolved into a tight range, a limit order market. It's important to pay attention to when a buy the close or sell the close trend begins. If it begins too early, like two hours before, it usually will not make it to the end of the day. If it begins in the final hour, you have a reasonable chance of it making it to the end of the day. Here we have a buy the close bull trend with two hours remaining in the day. It's probably not going to continue up in a buy the close bull trend until the end of the day. It's too climactic, too extreme, and there's too much time left. It reversed into a bear channel and then a trading range at the end of the day. We have a bear trend and then we started to get a lot of small doji bars that were going sideways. It evolved into a limit order market, a tight trading range at the end of the day. Traders should not be trading when the market is starting to do this late in the day. Is it possible to make money trading in a range that that's tight? When it's this tight, you're not going to make money. You'll win on some trades, you'll lose on others, and you'll probably find a little bit more. And you'll probably make mistakes, especially at the end of the day. When the market enters a tight range at the end of the day, or if it's any kind of a limit order market or trading range at the end of the day, or a channel at the end of the day, it's usually better not to trade. I talked about, at the end of the day, the final hour or so, traders should be looking for breakouts. And sometimes if the range is broad enough, they can trade trading ranges. They should be looking to enter with stops, for example, reversals in a trading range or pullbacks in a trend, or on the close of bars if you have a buy the close finish or a sell the close finish. If you see a buy the close rally or a sell the close bear trend forming at the end of the day, and there's much more than 30 minutes left today, certainly more than an hour, you have to assume it's not going to last until the end of the day. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of three videos about trading at the end of the day.