 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on candles, setups, and signal bars. In this video, I'm going to talk about tight trading ranges as setups, and I'm also going to be talking about II patterns and breakout mode. Here's a tight trading range, and if the context is bad for a breakout, then more likely the trading range will continue. After about 10 or 20 bars, when a range is extremely tight, traders should just not trade. They should simply wait for the breakout because after you have 10 or 20 bars, chances are you're going to have more bars before there's a breakout. And when the range is very tight like this, it's very difficult to make money, even scalping with limit orders. Better to wait for the breakout. Sometimes early in a tight trading range, there can be a buy signal bar. And if you get a buy signal bar in the bottom third, sometimes it's worth taking if the context is good. If you get a sell signal bar in the upper third, it's sometimes worth taking if the context is good. In the last video, I talked about an inside bar, a bar where the high is at or below the high of the prior range. And it's low is above or at the low of the prior bar. So this is an inside bar. And it's followed here by a second inside bar. This bar, it's high is at or below the high of that bar. It's low is at or above the low of this bar. So we have an inside bar and then a second consecutive inside bar. And I call this an inside-inside pattern or an eye-eye pattern. So there's an inside bar. And then we have a second consecutive inside bar. The same is true over here. Inside bar, consecutive inside bar. So it's an eye-eye. And this is an eye-eye as well. Sometimes you get a third or even a fourth consecutive inside bar. So you can get an eye-eye-eye or an eye-eye-eye. And it really does not mean any more than simply an eye-eye. I-O-I, very common if you have an inside bar. This bar is inside that bar. Very common that this bar is actually an outside bar. Its high is at or above the high of the prior bar. Its low is at or below the high of the prior bar. To me this is an inside bar inside of this bar. And this bar is an outside bar. It's outside of that bar. So we have I-O-I. So this bar is inside of that bar. Remember, inside bar usually refers to the bar to the left. So this bar is inside of that bar. This bar is inside of this bar. Here we have what I call an I-O-I pattern. We have an inside bar. And this bar is an outside bar. I look at this as an inside bar inside of this bar. We have inside, outside, inside. And it's a breakout mode pattern. In fact, I would call this I-O-I-I because it's an I-I pattern. An outside bar and a pair of inside bars. And the outside bar is preceded by an inside bar. It's just a sign of a market looking to break up. So I-O-I, inside, outside, inside. I-O-I-I, inside, outside, inside, inside. You can also get an outside, inside, outside bar. I know it's getting confusing, but sometimes that's what you get. We have an inside bar here, which means this is an outside bar. So we have an outside bar, inside bar, another outside bar. So this is an O-I-O setup. Again, it's just a sign of a sideways market that is trying to break out or getting ready to break out. It's a breakout mode setup. In this chart, there are many inside bars and there are several I-I patterns as well. Inside bar, inside of another inside bar. So it's an I-I. And here's another I-I here. This bar is inside that bar. This bar is inside that bar. Break out mode. Sometimes you get reversals. Here, bear trend and then I-I. And it ended up ultimately reversing up. It went a little bit lower, but ultimately reversed up. I-I, we have an inside bar here. And this bar is outside that bar. So it's an I-I pattern there. And where else? Over here, we have an inside bar. And this bar is outside the prior bar. So we have a pair of I-I bars. Again, breakout mode patterns. Any small tight trading range like this can be a signal. But the context has to be good. So if it's occurring in the middle of an extended tight trading range like this, the probability that the setup will lead to a breakout is small. But if it's occurring late in a trend, you have a better chance of a reversal. Most of the time when you get I-I patterns or I-O-I or any of these small tight trading range patterns, they're occurring within bigger tight trading ranges or extended tight trading ranges. And they are meaningless. Outside bars, there are lots of them on this chart as well. As far as an outside bar, here's an outside down bar. It reversed up. Here's a big outside down bar. These hours show all the outside bars or a lot of the outside bars. And for the most part, they do not have any predictive value. And there's just a sign that the market is going sideways. It went up and went down. Or it went down and then it went up here. It's usually part of a trading range. You need context. These small signal bars, these small tight trading range patterns, very common in trading ranges and they do not have any meaning. But if the context is right, they can lead to a swing up or down. Inside bar, inside the prior bars range. Here are several inside bars on this chart. I-I consecutive inside bars. There are a couple up here. I showed earlier up here and then down here. I-O-I an inside bar after an outside bar. Over here is an example. And then over here, another example. So, an inside bar following an outside bar. An outside bar, it engulfs the prior bars range. Many examples here. Now I said that these small tight trading ranges, I-I's, I-O-I's, any of them, can lead to reversals or breakouts. But, what's key is the context. What do the bars to the left look like? Context is all of the bars to the left. Here we have a small inside bar. And the bar before it is also an inside bar. So it's an I-I pattern. Remember, the inside bar can have a low at the low of the prior bar. The inside bar, its low has to be at or above the low of the prior bar. So even though this bar has the same low as this bar, it's still an inside bar. And when I talk about good context, I mean the bars to the left make it reasonable to expect a swing up or down. For example, what's the context here? We have a bull trend. But the bull trend went sideways and formed an expanding triangle. Low, low, lower, and then a series of higher highs. And we broke above it, and the breakout might be failing. Both I-I bars are closing on their lows. This is a reasonable sell setup looking for some kind of a swing down. So you sell with a stop just below the low of that second inside bar. Before I talked about small bars as being trading range bars, especially if they overlap prior bars. And that's the case here. But they're trading range bars after a bull breakout. And the trading range only lasted three or four bars. So it's a pullback. Therefore, the trend is likely to continue up. And in this particular case, we have a bull trend, a pullback, a breakout here to a new high. And this pullback is testing the breakout point. So it's a breakout pullback or a breakout test. And this is an inside bar following an outside bar. Even though it's barely an outside bar, it is. But it's an IOI bull flag. Bull flag because we have a bull trend and not enough bars to be 50-50. The odds still favor the bulls. So whenever a trading range is small and it's occurring in a trend, chances are it's simply a pullback in that trend. Bull breakout, a pullback testing the breakout point, creating a gap. Even though this low touched that high, to me, it did not drop below that high. And we were trying to reverse up here. This is a potential start of a swing up. Talking about good context, what's bad context? Here, we have a strong bull trend. And then we got the biggest bull bar coming late in the bull trend. And we have a gap this low, this high. Is this bar more likely a measuring gap leading to a measured move up? Or is it more likely an exhaustive end of the trend that will be followed by a closure of the gap? A sell-off down below the high of this bar. Usually when you get a big bar late in a trend, it's more likely to be an exhaustive end of the trend than the short of a new leg up. Here we have an inside bar. Inside of an inside bar. Inside of another inside bar. So this is an III pattern. But it's an III following a very big bull bar late in a bull trend. So it increases the chances that it is an exhaustion bar here. And that this will lead to a reversal. Traders will sell on a stop below the low of that bar. They'd get filled on this small doji bar. And then we got a strong break out below the III. And at this point, we have a reversal. We went up and we went down. And we'll probably at a minimum get to the low of the biclimax bar. And we may fall for a measured move, which we did. Context, really important. Here we have another IOI pattern. Inside bar following outside bar. But look to the left. It's a 20 bar tight trading range. Should I sell below the low of this bare inside bar? No, because chances are the sell-off is not going to go very far. And it may not even go far enough to make a scalp. It's not a reversal pattern. There's nothing to reverse. We're going sideways. Chances are if we break out, we'll simply go more sideways. Markets have inertia. And they tend to continue what they've been doing. Especially if they've been doing something a long time. And we've had a tight trading range here for 15 bars. Very small bars. Better to wait for the breakout than to place any trades in here. You can see it lasted another 20 bars and still didn't break out. And this range probably is too small even to make money scalping using limit orders. Outside bars, you've got to be really careful with outside bars. They are often traps. You need good context if you're going to be trading them. Because think about it. Let's say you look at this bear trend and we get a reversal up. And you say, wow, that's a great looking bull reversal bar. It is. But it's following five consecutive bear bars with no pullbacks. So this is the first pullback after five consecutive bear bars. If you just look at that bull bar, you say, oh, I'm going to buy right above the high of that bar. Well, it's also the first pullback after five bear bars. This is not good context. Think about that as well. It's a big outside bar. So if you buy up here, your stop is here. That's far. So your risk is big. And because it's following five bear bars, the probability of a profitable long is low. If you buy up here above the high of this bar, you're taking a low probability trade with big risk. Big risk means bad risk reward. You're buying a trade that has bad risk reward and bad probability. That is a bad trade. More likely you'd make money selling up there. I personally would not buy that. If anything, I would be prepared to sell. Bad probability because you're following five consecutive bear bars, several closing at or below their midpoints and near the lows of the bars. And you got big risk. Chances are bears will be looking to sell above this bar, betting that it's a trap, that it will trap bulls into buying too high in a low probability trade. We went up a little bit around a 50% pullback, and then we started to go down. Outside bar, bad context. Probably not reversal, probably sideways, maybe even down. Not a good buy setup. I said earlier that outside bars are very common within trading ranges. Here's an outside bar. Here's another outside bar. And it's just part of a tight trading range. They occur very commonly in trading ranges. Trading ranges are constantly trying to break out. And sometimes the breakout can be a single bar, and it ends up as an outside bar. In a tight trading range like this, instead of selling below the low of that outside down bar, you make more money buying with a limit order at its low. Same here. Outside down, nobody's going to sell below. I'm not going to sell below. So many bulls wanted to buy it that they bought the close. So as soon as that bar closed, look what happened. The next bar opened up the close and raced right up. Traders saw it as a bear trap, and they were so eager to buy that they didn't even try to buy below the bar. As soon as that bear bar closed with that tail, traders bought the market. Pretty good size outside down bar. But at this point, it's a 10 bar trading range. And if you sell below, you're selling at the bottom of a tight trading range. Trading range, you want to buy low, sell high, and scalp. So selling below that bar is the exact opposite of what traders should be doing. If anything, if they're going to be taking any trade here, they buy with a limit order at that low, betting that the trading range will continue. And since they're at the bottom of the range, if the trading range continues, probably it's going to go up far enough for at least a scalp. Bulls will place a limit order by the low of that bar. Outside bars, if the context is good, they can be good signal bars. Again, look to the left. Here we've got a bull trend and then a sideways pullback. We went down, pullback, down a little bit more. And then we reversed up strongly with an outside bar. Remember, in general, I don't buy above the bear bar. I like to buy above bull bars if I'm buying a pullback in a bull trend. So to me, the buy is above the high of this bar. We went down, we went up. It's a two bar reversal. On a higher timeframe chart, it's a single reversal bar. And the buy is above the high of the two bars. Usually it's better to buy above the high of the bull bar. In this case, the outside bar is the bull bar. Traders place a buy stop just above the high of that bull bar. And then they get long on this bar as it goes above the high of the two bar reversal. I want to talk a little bit about II patterns and breakout mode. Big bull reversal. And we have an inside bar followed by another inside bar. Well, same thing here. Bear breakout, inside bar followed by an inside bar. So both are II patterns. And whenever I see an II pattern, I always assume that it is a triangle on a smaller timeframe chart. So if this is a five minute chart, you can look at a one minute chart. And it probably is going to be a triangle on a smaller timeframe chart. You know, as I said before, if you get three I's, you know, III, III, three consecutive inside bars, and then you can get four consecutive inside bars III, II. Doesn't matter. Two, three, four. It's all the same. They are triangles on smaller timeframe charts, and they all represent breakout mode. And since we have a bull trend here, chances are the bull trend is going to resume. This is to me not a very good short below that II. And then we've got two legs down, one pull back two. Here, I would start thinking about buying. We're trying to get a bear breakout to reverse this. As good as this bear bar is, it's small compared to this. And look at the follow through bar. It's a bull bar. It's a bull bar. That is a problem. It increases the chances of a failed breakout and two legs down. One, sideways, two. Let's say this is a 60 minute chart. And we have an II pattern over here. I said II patterns are triangles on smaller timeframe charts. Not always, but probably 90% of the time. If you look at a smaller timeframe chart, you'll see a triangle. So here's a five minute chart. And a triangle simply means there are three pushes down or three pushes up. Here we have a little push down, second, third. Here we have a push up, second, tiny third. So to me, this II on the 60 minute chart is simply a triangle on the five minute chart. And you can see what followed. We got a bull breakout above the triangle. Remember, I also said this is two legs down. So it's a high two bull flag. So leg one, sideways, leg two. And it's a high two bull flag. Not great to buy above the bear bar. Better to buy above a bull bar, like above that or above this. Here's a second entry buy for the II. And the second entry is IOI. It doesn't matter what you call it, but it's a second entry buy. This is a higher probability buy, buying above this bar. You can take that buy. But here we've got another inside bar and a lot of traders would place a buy stock to buy just above its high. This is the entry price for the traders who took the buy right there. And you can see the market went sideways for another hour. And that is this. Here's a pretty tight trading range. And the more bars that get added to it, the more the probability becomes the same for the bulls and for the bears. However, whenever you have a tight trading range relatively late in a bull trend, it often becomes the final bull flag. So you get a breakout and the breakout reverses. Anytime you see a tight trading range late in a bull trend, you always have to be thinking about a final bull flag. Here is an II pattern late in a bear trend, but it's also a higher low and a bull trend. The context is pretty good for the bulls. Two legs down, one pull back, two. We have a bear breakout with a very big tail. And then we have a bull bar for the second inside bar closing on its high. So this is a reasonably good buy setup. Better than a 50% pullback. A higher low, well above the bottom of the bull leg. Strong sell off. Higher low, yes, but strong sell off. If I'm buying, I prefer to see the II have a good bull bar for its second bar. And it did here. The second bar of the II is a bull bar closing on its high. So that's a higher probability by set up buying as the next bar goes above the high of that buy signal bar. There's another II over here. And you can argue higher high, major trend reversal, full trend, bear breakout, higher high. Really not enough bars for a major reversal, but it might still be a major reversal. It's reasonable to take that short. You're also a double top here. You can call this a bigger higher high, major trend reversal. Full trend, bear breakout, higher high here, double top, higher high. Or you could say full trend, bear breakout, higher high. But anyway, you're at the top of a trading range. You have a double top here. You have a bigger double top here. You have a major trend reversal for this bull trend, a bigger major trend reversal for this bull trend. And then you have a bear bar in an II closing on its low. So the second bar of the II is a bear bar closing in its low. To me, that's a good sell setup. You sell just below the low of that bear bar. That bear close on the second bar increases the probability that the short would be profitable. Take a look at this slide. We've got a bull breakout, a pullback, and a second bull breakout. And we are accelerating upward. A lot of bulls will buy closes. So if they buy this close with a strong bull bar, they know it's a second leg up. And therefore, it could possibly lead to a trading range or a reversal. And then right after they buy, they see a bear bar. Even though it's a doji, it's still a bear bar. The buy the close bulls are nervous. They're disappointed. They're afraid that we might reverse down very soon. So a lot of them try to get out break even at the original entry. And here we have an II pattern. The second bar, although it's not a bear bar, it's still not a good buy signal bar. So these buy the close bulls now have two bars that are disappointing. And they're going to be thinking about maybe trying to get out break even. Bad follow through. Bull bar. And then two bars sideways. Neither one has a bull body. And second leg up. This could be a trap. And buy the close bulls are going to be thinking about trying to get out break even. II is a two bar tight trading range. And like any tight trading range, it represents balance between the bulls and the bears. An II pattern, a tight trading range, it can be the final bull flag. Even if we do get the bull breakout, traders will be thinking one push up, two pushes up. Maybe we'll get three pushes up into a parabolic wedge top and a reversal down. And again, you have disappointed by the close bulls who are hoping for any kind of a bounce so that they can get out break even. This II represents balance. Bulls and bears balanced. If the market gets away from that balanced area, it might come right back to it. And therefore, it could be a final bull flag. Remember, we've got a bull trend and we have an area of balance. And it could be the final bull flag. If the market breaks to the upside, it can come back down. And because it's a third push up and a possible wedge top, this small II could lead, in fact, to a trend reversal, not simply sideways. So a final flag reversal can lead to a reversal and not simply an end of the bull trend. So you get disappointed by the close bulls. And now when they see this bar, a lot of them place a limit order to get out break even. Did not get filled on the second bar, did not get filled on the third bar. And these bulls are getting really nervous. They still have their limit order trying to get out break even. And look what happened here. It got right to that close, but not above it. The bulls who tried to get out break even failed and they're giving up here. Some of the bulls saw these three bars, no bull body. Instead of trying to get out break even, they wanted to get out with a minimum loss. So they'll place a limit order to sell out of their lungs above the high of the prior bar. And that's what happened here. This bar went a little bit above the high of the prior bar, immediately reversed down because you had bulls giving up. And this is a give up bar. Now we have four bars without a bull body, three of them bare bars. And this one's closing closer to its low than that one. And this one is closer to its low than this one. Probably the bulls are in the process of giving up. And you can see what happened. They gave up on this bar and this bar. Sideways here, the bulls were hoping for any kind of a bounce that would let them out with a smaller loss. Bears were hoping for any kind of a bounce so they could sell higher. Both bulls and bears wanting to sell. It could not go higher. It just went down. It trapped the bulls into a bad buy. And they had to exit quickly here and here. This is an outside, outside. We have an I-I here. This bar is outside that bar. And this bar is outside that bar. And in this particular case, outside bar in a tight trading range, the context is such, you know by the close bulls were desperate to get out. By the close of this bar, you know the odds are we're going lower. The bulls could not get out break even. So the ones who did not get out with a small loss above that bar are desperate and they are going to sell. Now here we have a bull trend and we have an IOI. This bar went a little bit above that bar. So it's an outside bar. And this bar is clearly an inside bar. You think, well, maybe by climax and sideways. Yes. But we have about an eight bar bull micro channel. Bear bar trying to reverse down. Almost certainly going to be bought. You can see they bought the low of that bar, creating this tail here. And bulls are expecting trend resumption up. They see an IOI, but they're going to assume it's a bull flag. And with the third bar being a bull bar, especially closing in its upper half, a lot of bulls will buy above its high. They'll put a stop way down here, thinking that maybe we'll get a couple of legs down, two or three legs down. But even if we do, we'll still probably resume up. And you can see what happened. The bulls bought here. We pulled back a little bit more. Other bulls bought here. Now we have a small double bottom bull flag, a high two bull flag, and the market accelerated upward. Here, the bears tried to reverse. They could not even get below the moving average. So this is a pullback to moving average in a bull trend. You have a high one and then a high two buy setup at the moving average in a bull trend. And both the high one and high two signal bars had bull bodies. Any bears who shorted, they might hold short after the first resumption up. They're going to get out after the second resumption up. And that's one of the reasons why a high two bull flag just above the moving average with a bull buy signal bar is a high probability trade. So yes, IOI is breakout mode, but it's in a bull trend above the moving average in a bull third bar. Breakout mode, but probably you get a bull breakout. Now I talked earlier about IOI patterns. And if you're looking to buy, it's higher probability if you're buying above a bull bar for the third bar. Here we have a small IOI. Third bar is a bull bar closing on its high. It's a higher probability buy than if it was a bear bar. Same here, another small IOI. Here, another IOI. And again, bull bar closing near its high above the moving average in a bull trend. It's a channel, but still higher lows and higher highs. So it's still a bull trend. Buying above a bull bar above the moving average is a reasonable buy. And the IOI is a pause in the bull trend. It represents some equilibrium between bulls and bears, but the probability still favors higher prices. When you see on IOI and the third bar is a pretty good looking bull inside bar closing on its high, it's a good buy setup. Here we have an IOI. So we have an IOI where this bar is actually outside of that bar. Irrelevant. It's a small pause in a bull trend. The odds are we're going higher. And then if we have an inside bar at the end of the tight trading range closing on its high just above the moving average, it's a reasonable buy. This is a more typical IOI in a bull trend. So it's a buy above the high of that bar. Here's an IIOI. Again, I wouldn't worry too much about the terminology. All you have to know is the market's going sideways in a bull trend and not too many bars. It's probably a pullback and not a trading range. Remember, if a pullback starts to grow to 20 or more bars, the probability of a bull breakout falls to the same as for a bear breakout. But as long as the pullback is only 3, 4, 5 bars, the odds still favor trend resumption. Since this is a bull trend, these little pullbacks probably are bull flags. It's more likely that we're going to continue higher. The opposite is true in a bear trend. Here we're getting lower lows, lower highs, staying mostly below the moving average. Traders are looking for sell setups. They want to sell below bear flags. Double top, bear flag, low 2, low 1, low 2, micro double top here. Doesn't matter what you call it. We're going down in a channel, lower lows, lower highs, and we're stalling at the moving average. This is an IOI. So we have an inside bar following an outside bar. And it's just below the moving average. Does not have a bear body, but it does not have a bull body. I think it's a reasonable sell setup. Bear's will place a stop order to sell just below the low of that bear bar. And they get short there. Same thing over here. Again, we have an IOI over here. Just below the moving average. Bear's will sell with a stop just below the low of that bar. Any time you see a small tight trading range, 2 bars, 3, 4, 5 bars, with small bars, the market's in breakout mode. Let's say this is a daily chart on the left. And then we have a 3 bar tight trading range. It's not really an II because this bar is not inside that. This high is above that high. And it's not an IOI because this low is above that low. It is a small tight trading range. And a bull trend. It's also a third push up. One, pull back two, pull back three. And bad follow through. Bull bar, bad follow through. Bull bar, bad follow through. Bull bar, bad follow through. So you've got to be thinking that this might lead to a reversal. And these patterns, even though it's not a perfect II or IOI or any of those other patterns that I talked about earlier, it's a 3 bar tight trading range, and it probably is a triangle on a smaller timeframe chart. This is a daily chart. And this is a 4 hour chart, a 240 minute chart. And this pink rectangle is this. And you can see three pushes down. One, two, three. So it's a triangle. Again, any small sideways pattern can be a breakout mode pattern. And they usually are triangles on some smaller timeframe chart. And when they come late in a trend, you have to be thinking about a possible reversal. In this video, I talked about tight trading ranges as setups, breakout mode patterns. And then I also talked about II patterns and breakout mode. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on candles, setups, and signal bars.