 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on trading Broad Bull channels. Like a channel, you expect reversals to be common, but because it's a bull trend, you have to assume that most of the reversals will fail. It's always better if you can diagnose the Broad Bull channel earlier. That way there, it allows you for an earlier entry on your swing trade. Because the sell-offs tend to be deep, bears can make money by selling rallies. For example, reversals down from new highs. Also, you have to expect that the follow-through after a new high is going to be bad. The bears are selling up there, and the bulls are selling to take profits. The bulls are selling to the bulls. This is a five-minute chart showing nine days of the E-mini, and the market is trending up, lower left, upper right, and lots of pullbacks, and some of them are pretty deep. Therefore, it's a Broad Bull channel. Here, the market went sideways for about two days, 150 bars in a tight range. And that's common when the market's in a Broad Bull channel. It usually has extended periods where it's sideways. For example, here, and then again here, and then again here. Also, it's common for the market to have very strong sell-offs, and at times become always in short. Strong sell-off here, here, protracted sell-off here, and then a very strong bear breakout here, below the bottom of the entire 150 bar range. The market's always in short during this sell-off. However, because it's a Broad Bull channel, unless it breaks strongly below all the lows, including this low, it's still in a trading range, as well as a Broad Bull channel. At this point, once it breaks below here, it's clearly in a trading range. When it breaks below a major higher low like that, it's also in a bear trend. It may quickly resume back into a bull trend, but at that instant, when it broke below all of these lows, it's in a bear trend and a trading range. Once it starts to reverse up strongly, it's then back to a bull trend and a trading range. Whether it's in a trading range or a Broad Bull channel, traders are going to be buying reversals up from near the bottom of the range, especially reversals up from breakouts below prior major lows. As I said, sell-offs are common. Sometimes they last a lot of bars and they can often reverse the market to always in short. For example, here, clearly the market was always in short somewhere in the middle of this bar. As long as the market's making a series of major higher lows, the bulls are going to assume that all the reversal attempts will fail, even if the market becomes always in short. When it's always in short here, it's likely to go lower, but unless it breaks strongly below the bottom of the range, a reversal up is more likely than a continued trend down. Bulls buy reversals up from all sell-offs. Sell-off reversing up. Sell-off, they buy the reversal up. They buy the reversal up. All day long. Every day. They expect the reversals down to fail and for the bull trend to resume. All trends are constantly trying to reverse. That's especially true in broad channels. Here we have a broad bull channel and at every high, bulls take profits because they think it might be a trading range instead of a broad bull channel. They want the broad bull channel to continue, but they know that much of the time the market's in their trading range, for example, here. And therefore, they tend to take profits at the prior high or above the prior high and then look to buy again lower. However, it's a trend. It's a weak trend. A broad bull channel is a weak bull trend, but it's a trend. And therefore, the odds are the tops are going to fail. Markets have inertia. They tend to continue to do what they've been doing. And if the market's in a bull trend, it'll tend to continue to be in a bull trend. Traders are always seeing tops. And the tops are real. We have a bull trend, a bear breakout, higher high, major trend reversal. It failed. And now we have three pushes up. One, two, three, a wedge top. However, all of the reversals fail and the market continues to make major higher lows. Higher high, major trend reversal, wedge top. And now we have a big double top. The market broke below the neckline. And what happened? The bear breakout failed and the market reversed up. Expanding triangle. We have a high, a higher high and a higher high. Yet the expanding triangle top failed. And we got a double bottom bull flag. Lots of double tops. There's one here, one here, one here, an attempt at one here, a double top lower high here, a double top attempt here. It doesn't matter. We have another one here, another one here. If you want, you can call this one a wedge. Because it's a bull trend, you have to assume that all of these tops are going to fail. And the bull trend will continue. Markets resist change. And because of that, every time the bears do get a reversal, even if it's strong, bulls expect it to fail and they buy a reversal up. Or they simply hold long and use a very wide stop. As I said, broad bull channels contain trading ranges. And therefore, a lot of the bars in a broad bull trend are also in a trading range. Whenever the market falls below a high or low or below a trend line, it might begin to enter a trading range. The bears are hoping that the break below the trend line will lead to a major trend reversal top, but more likely a trading range. Whenever the market is in a trading range, there are always both buy setups and sell setups, and both are reasonable. The market keeps breaking below trend lines, and you redraw the trend line on the next reversal up. The trend lines get flatter, and the channel gets flatter and broader. Every time you get a new reversal up, you have a new low that you can use to draw a channel. And you can see the lines are getting flatter, and the channel is getting flatter and broader. If I had a line drawn across the top of the channel, the distance between the top of the channel to the bottom of the channel is getting greater as we continue to draw flatter and flatter trend lines. Initially, we had a very tight channel, and by this point we have a very broad channel. This was a steep channel, and this is a much flatter channel. That's the natural history of a bull trend, and eventually it evolves into a trading range, and then at some point it reverses into a bear trend. Remember, the market's in a bull trend. At some point it transitions into a trading range. The bulls want trend resumption up, the bears want trend reversal down. But as long as it doesn't reverse into a bear trend, traders will buy breakouts. They'll buy breakouts below prior lows. Here we broke below a low, they buy the reversal up. Broke below this low, buy the reversal up. Broke below this low, and below that low, they'll buy the reversal up. Betting that the market will either remain in a trading range, or the bull trend will resume. Very strong bear breakout. At some point in here, the market's always in short, meaning the market will probably go lower. However, once it gets down to the bottom of the trading range, the most important major higher load to the left, the bears need the sell-off to continue. And if instead it stalls and reverses up, traders will assume that the bears will buy back their shorts, and the bulls will buy, either for resumption of the trading range or a resumption of the bull trend. Trading ranges Trading ranges often have very strong second legs down. For example, leg one, and then an even stronger leg two. Leg one, and then an even stronger leg two. I call that a second leg trap. It traps traders into thinking that the bears have won, and that we've begun a bear trend, and that this breakout is going to be the start of a protracted bear trend. But instead, it simply traps weak traders into selling near the low. Second leg traps common in trading ranges, also common in broad bull channels. Every bull trend needs a series of higher lows, especially major higher lows. Major higher low is a higher low that is relatively strong and breaks to a new high, usually breaks to a new high. As long as it's forming major higher lows, it's in a bull trend or a trading range. If it breaks below major higher lows, then it's no longer in a bull trend. It's then either in a bear trend or a trading range. If it reverses up strongly, at some point it goes back to being a bull trend. As long as any of these reversals stay above this low, the bulls still might be in a broad bull channel. In other words, we could have a sell-off all the way down here, and then up to a new high, another very deep sell-off, another new high, and it still would be in a broad bull channel. A very broad one, but still a broad bull channel. I mentioned that it's helpful to your bottom line if you can diagnose what is going on as early as possible, and that allows you to trade it appropriately as early as possible. Whenever I look at a chart, I'm always wondering where are we in the market cycle? Are we in a breakout? Are we in a reversal? Are we in a channel? Are we in a trading range? Sometimes we're in several things. Markets going sideways, and then we have three consecutive bull bars, two of them big, closing on their highs, breaking above this lower high. The market is clearly always in long. And as long as the market stays above the bottom of the bull trend here, then the odds are any sell-off will be either simply a bare leg in a trading range or a bull flag leading to higher prices. Sometimes broad bull channels become always in short. Here we have a breakout to a new high, and then we get a series of bare bars. At this point, we have three bare bars with decent bodies, four bare bars if you count this one. Is the market always in short? Well, it's more likely to go a little bit lower, but not necessarily below the bottom of the bull trend. So in that sense, it's always in short because we're probably going a little bit lower. For me, it's probably big up, big down, which means big confusion, and the market will probably go sideways for a little while before the bulls try to resume up. A good bull bar, we have a bare bar, and then we have a reversal up. We have the bull breakout. This is testing the bottom of the bull breakout, which is common. And it's a higher low. If the bulls did exit their long after three or four bare bars, they'll look to buy again above a strong bull bar. For example, above the high of this bar, just in case the bull trend resumes up. They know the downside risk is not that great. Big up, big down, probably sideways. Unless we break below this low, the bulls will assume that the best the bears get is a bare leg in a trading range, which means it'll be followed by a bull leg in the trading range or by a resumption of the bull trend. And therefore, bulls are willing to buy a reversal up. Trading range with lower highs, higher lows. It's a triangle. Broad bull channels often spend a lot of time going sideways. And this is an example. It's sideways here for about 40 bars. And now we're at the apex of a triangle. But it's still forming higher lows here, here, and here, even though it's not forming higher highs here. This is not a higher high. This is not a higher high. And neither is that. And this is not a higher high. And neither is that. Another strong breakout. A pause and a small second leg up. And now we have three consecutive bear bars. Two decent sized bodies. This one fairly big, closing on its low. Triangles are often final bull flags, which means the market often pulls back to the apex of that flag. A lot of bulls will get out if they see a breakout, a small second leg up, and then three bear bars breaking out of a triangle. Is it always in short with these three bear bars? Probably not. But it's enough of a pullback after a buy climax so that the market might go sideways. How do you know that the market's in a broad bull channel? You usually need at least three legs up. So one, pullback two, pullback three. So at this point, it's in a bold channel. But usually when you get the three legs up, it's also in a wedge and that could lead to a reversal. Different ways to count it. One, two, three. Or you can view this as a double top and then a breakout above a double top. If the market has a double top, it has two legs up. One, pullback two. If it breaks above the double top and reverses, that is a type of wedge top, even though it does not look like a wedge. It functions like a wedge. So a breakout above a double top that fails is the same as a wedge top. Some traders would sell the reversal down. We have a breakout, a pause, a smaller bar, and a second leg up. We have a potential final flag and different ways to draw a wedge. Bear bar closing on its low. At a minimum, traders would expect a couple legs down, maybe a test of the apex of the triangle. It's okay to sell the reversal down. Not clearly always in short yet. Sideways more likely than down. Although here, it ultimately went down. Bears will sell below bear bars. They'll sell here. We have an II, a small triangle. We'll sell the breakout. And they'll sell above bars as well. Above this bar or above the top of the sell climax. And then another low, two, short. Two legs up, one pullback two. Another reason to go short. A lot of times you look at a chart and you're not sure if it's a broad bull channel, if it's a trading range, if it's a wedge. What you do is you simply trade what is clear. And a lot of times you don't fully get confident about which pattern is dominant until well into the pattern. We have a double bottom. And we have a bare breakout below the double bottom. But it failed twice. We bounced here. And we bounced again here. And the bull bars here are closing the other high. Probably going higher. We have a good looking bull bar here. And a second buy signal bar here. It's reasonable to buy on a stop just above the high of that bar. Consecutive bull bars breaking out. Strong closing on their highs. Big bodies. Traders will buy that close. High probability of follow through buying. The market's always in long. The market's always in long. We have a good looking bull bar here. And a second buy signal bar here. It's reasonable to buy on a stop just above the high of that bar. Consecutive bull bars breaking out. Strong closing on their highs. Big bodies. Traders will buy that close. High probability of follow through buying. The market's always in long. The bears. They see two reversals down. One pull back two. And they'll short this. Especially since it's a type of second leg up. We have a pair of strong bull bars. A smaller bull bar. And then a bigger bull bar again. So that's a second leg up. This is not a major reversal. Traders selling here are looking for a scalp. After five consecutive bull bars. And four of the bull bars closing on their highs. The reversal is probably minor. But given that it's a low two. And we have two small legs up here. It might fall far enough for the bears to make a scalp. A bear break out. And a follow through bar. Some bears will sell the close. Expecting at least a little bit more down. The market's reversing up from a higher one. Therefore it might be forming a channel. The lines are not parallel. But that does not matter. A lot of times you'll get other highs and lows. And it takes a lot of bars before it's clearly a channel with fairly parallel lines. Can you buy through this bear close? We have five consecutive bear bars. Well, you know, it's not great to buy the close. But some bulls will buy it. It's about a 50% pullback. We're testing the breakout point above this high. And they'll bet that big up, big down means trading range more likely than bear trend. A bull trend that's as strong as this rarely ever becomes a bear trend. And therefore the sell off is probably a bear leg in a trading range. The bulls who do buy would put their stop below the bottom of the bull trend. This is the biggest bear bar of the entire sell off. Given that the odds are we're not going to fall below the bottom of the bull trend without at least going sideways first. This could be an exhaustive sell climax. A bigger bear bar late in a bear trend. And therefore some bulls will buy the close. Higher probability buying the reversal up. Especially if you have a pretty good looking bull bar closing on its high. This is a reasonable buy the close bar. All of these bars are reasonable buy the close bars. And therefore if there's a sell off and it does not fall below the bottom of the bull trend. A lot of bulls will buy above a strong bull bar. Betting that we'll get back to that high close. That would allow them to get out break even on their first buy. And then with a profit on their second buy. We have a bull breakout above a bear channel. A bear channel and a bull trend. It's a bull flag. And traders will buy a high one pullback from this bull breakout. Or they'll buy a double bottom bull flag after this breakout. Triangle. Forming higher lows. Very strong bull breakout. Stronger than the bear reversal. Traders will assume the market will go higher. We have a bull IOI. A bull bar. And an IOI at the apex of a triangle. Bulls will buy above the high of this bull bar on a stock. Because broad channels have deep sell offs. Bears can make money as well as the bulls. Some bears will look at this and say, well it's not all that strong. And they'll place limit orders to sell at the high and scale in higher. If I see a strong bar like this, I'm not going to sell at that high. I'll wait to see what follows. Six consecutive bear bars closing below their midpoints. Chances are we're in a trading range. And at this point we have a smaller triangle within a larger triangle. The bull breakout probably will fail to get very far before coming back to the effects of the triangle. Some bears will sell either at the top of the triangle or one or two or three points higher up. Expecting the market to come back down to the breakout point. The bear bars always pay attention to breakouts and pullbacks. Here we have a very strong bull breakout. But as strong as it was, it came back below the breakout point. What do you think the bears will believe if the market breaks above this high? They believe that even if it goes up higher, just like after this strong breakout, there'll be a pullback below the breakout point. Bears selling at this high will scale in higher, betting that the market will come back below the breakout point. Because the market is going sideways so much and having deep pullbacks, the bulls are less confident that the trend is going to be strong. They therefore tend to buy pullbacks and not breakouts to new high. Although here, clearly bulls bought. A lot of bulls will not buy that. They only want to buy pullbacks. And then they'll either take profits at the new high or they'll take profits when the market starts to stall. The bears know that the bulls will do that. That the bulls will take profits at new highs and prefer to buy pullbacks. And the bears therefore are not worried about too much buying at the prior high. And they'll sell at the prior high and sell more higher. For example, since there was a very strong breakout here, yet the pullback fell below the breakout point. Some bears will place a limit order to sell at this high or at this high or that high. Expecting that, there'll be a pullback below the breakout point. If they sell here and it goes straight down, they make money. If they sell here and it goes up higher, they'll sell more higher and then get out break even when the market drops below their entry point. So they get out break even on their first sell and with a profit on their higher sell. Scale in higher. I talk about different ways to do that in the videos on scaling in. Some traders do a fixed number of points higher. Two points, three points, four points. And some traders sell with a stop on a reversal down. You want your second entry at least the size of a minimum scalp above the first entry. So the minimum scalp in the E-mini is one point. You want your second entry at least one point higher. The bars here are big, about five points tall. Therefore, if you are scaling in, it's better to be scaling in more than one point above your first entry. Better to be scaling in two, three, four or five points above your first entry. A lot of traders prefer to scale in on a reversal down as long as that second entry is at least as big as a scalp above the first. They prefer to be two to three times bigger than the minimum scalp. We dropped a little bit below this high and then allowed the bears to get out break even on their first entry and then with a profit on either of their second entries. Some bears will hold part of their position short until either the end of the day or until there's a reasonable buy setup. Here, this is not a particularly good buy setup, but we're getting a lot of tails below bars. We're near this prior low. We might get profit taking into the close. So it's reasonable to get out on a reversal up. Traders are always trying to decide if there's a 60% probability of the next bar or next few bars going up or going down. We have a wedge bottom and then a rally. A lot of the bulls will buy closes, including even this close, betting that the first reversal down will be minor and lead either to a trading range or to a bull flag. We have a big outside up bar and a small wedge. Reasonable to buy above the high of that bar. Or here we have a second entry buy, also a good looking buy signal bar, reasonable to buy above its high. 60% chance we'll go at least high enough up for a small profit. Higher probability, you wait until there are consecutive strong bull bars and traders will either buy at the market right before the close of the bar or they'll buy at the close of the bar. When I talk about buy the close, I'm talking about as soon as the market closes, you hit buy the market and you get filled at the open of the next bar. Or a second or so before the bar closes, you hit buy the market and you get filled right around the close of this bar. Traders buying up here have a higher probability of a profit at a minimum based upon a measured move from the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar of the breakout, which would be up here. However, whenever you get higher probability, usually the stop is further away, so your risk is greater. One of the characteristics of a broad bull channel is that the follow through is often bad when a market breaks out to a new high. And that's in part because bulls will take profits, they prefer to buy pullbacks and not breakouts to new highs, and bears start to short. We have a bull breakout and follow through. This is a breakout bar of this bull flag, and this is a follow through bar. This is also a breakout bar above this high, and then this is the follow through bar. Terrible follow through for the bulls. As I said, strong consecutive bull bars probably will get at least a 60% chance of a measured move up. But this follow through is terrible, and it creates big up, big down. It increases the likelihood that the market will go sideways for a while instead of straight up. A lot of the bulls will take profits on the reversal down. Small leg one, pull back leg two. Big leg one, pull back leg two. And you can even argue a parabolic wedge. One, pull back. Two, pause. And three, pause. And then you get a bear doji bar, a small bear reversal bar. Some bulls will take partial profits there. Or, once they see three or four consecutive bear bars, they'll exit on the close of that third or fourth bear bar. The bears know the bulls are getting out, and therefore the bears will sell. Knowing that the bulls just get out, and they'll be less willing to buy a bar or two later. And the bears were able to make a scalp down. We have five consecutive bear bars closing below their midpoints, near their lows. The market's always in short for many traders. However, it's still a higher low above the bottom of the bull trend. This is more likely a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Big up, big down, big confusion usually means sideways. Traders do not want to be selling too low in what they think is going to be a trading range. Again, did not hit the stop below the bottom of the bull trend. It's a higher low, a bull bar closing on its high. You have buy the closed bulls from here, who were disappointed, but never had an opportunity to get out. Once they were disappointed by this bar or this bar, the market never went back to that close. Usually, these bulls will buy more above a bull bar, betting that the market will come back to that close and allow them to get out. If you do something reasonable, and you manage it reasonably, usually you can avoid a loss and make a profit. Bulls buying here, disappointed by this, buy more above a bull bar here, betting that it will come back up here to let them out break even on their first entry, and with a profit on their lower entry. The bears know that, and if they did sell this third consecutive bear bar's closed, and they did not take profits down here, they will get out above that bull bar. And bulls buy with a stop. Even if a bull did not buy this closed and hold long for all of this, Any bull who bought for any reason here did not buy at all. If they're flat, they know the odds are, if you get this bull bar, buy the closed bulls from up here are going to buy. And other bulls will buy as well, expecting the market to get back to that close, because it was reasonable to buy that close, and after you were disappointed, you never had a chance to get out. So this is a good buy for the bulls, and a good place for bears to buy back their shorts. Bull breakout, bad follow through. Bull breakout, bad follow through. Two legs sideways, we have big up, big down, big confusion. You'd expect a trading range. Trading range has a lot of two-legged moves. Here we have leg one, pull back. Leg two, slightly lower high, but still a second leg up. It's subdivided into leg one, pull back, leg two. It even subdivided further into one, pull back two, one, pull back two. Potential double top. We have two legs up in what is probably a trading range. Bulls will take profits on a stop on a reversal down below that bear bar, and bears will sell for a scalp. Very strong bull leg, stronger than the bear leg. Most traders will assume the market is still always in long, and therefore they believe it's more likely to go higher than to reverse down. The market went sideways. Now it's in a small triangle within a bigger triangle after a strong rally. Odds are an attempt at a second leg up. Low one, and then low two. And the low two subdivided into low one, low two. And it's a triangle, but probably always in long. This is a small triangle within a bigger triangle after a strong bull breakout. On a reversal up, higher low, higher low. Traders see it is sideways forming higher lows. Triangle. The bears will buy back shorts, and the bulls will buy again, especially above a bull bar, and especially if there's a second entry buy. Here there's a first entry buy above this bear bar, or above this bull doji. And then a better looking bull bar here for a second entry buy. Strong breakout, and again, bad follow through. Wedge. Three pushes up. One pull back. Two pull back. Three. We may go higher, but this is possibly a wedge top. A breakout of a triangle. Late in a bull trend. Usually the triangle becomes the final bull flag. The breakout goes up. Three, four, or five bars. Usually reverses down back to the apex of the triangle. And there's a small triangle here, so breakout mode. And we're getting a bear breakout. Bulls will exit long on the breakout below the triangle, or on the close of this strong bear bar. And bears will sell, expecting a test down to the apex of the triangle. If the bears did not take partial profits there, they could have held for a swing until the end of the day. Higher probability, instead of selling up here, we have a bear breakout and a follow through bar. Strong enough sell off, probably if we get a second leg down. Maybe a measured move based upon the height of this upper trading range. So, high probability short, or at least a small second leg down. In broad bull channels, it's a channel because you have a lot of reversals. But the odds are, since the market's in a bull trend, most of the reversal attempts will fail, even if they look pretty good. It's always good to diagnose any pattern early, because it allows you to enter early. Often your stop is closer, so your risk is less, and there's much more profit potential. In a broad bear channel, the bulls sell above prior highs to take profits, and the bears sell above prior highs, looking for at least a scalp back down. Also, because it's a channel, you have to assume that breakouts to new highs are going to have bad follow through bear bars after a breakout to new high. It's a sign of bulls taking profits and bears selling for a scalp down. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on trading broad bull channels.