 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on losing when a good trade goes bad. I want to begin by talking about some rules that traders can use to help avoid big losses. And I also want to make the obvious point that all trends eventually disappoint traders. And therefore you have to make decisions when you do see some disappointment. Every trader sometimes makes mistakes. And I talk about losses that are due to mistakes in the videos on losing because of mistakes. For example, let's say a beginner saw this as a double top and he sold on a stop below this bar. He got filled right here. Despite six bull bars in the past eight bars, he still took the short. And the sell signal bar had a bull body closing of its midpoint. That is a mistake to take that short. Most losing trades, even for experts, are due to mistakes and not bad luck. Every trade has a probability that you're going to win and a probability that you're going to lose. And therefore even experienced traders are going to lose simply because of luck. A big difference between an expert and a beginner is that an expert tends to get out very quickly when he makes a mistake. He loses less. He's not emotionally attached to a position. He doesn't feel a need to prove that he's right. For example, holding on to a bad trade hoping that eventually he'll be proven right. If he's wrong, he gets out. I want to talk in this video about market risk and how to minimize it or how to avoid it. That's risk beyond your personal control. Personal risk, that means you made mistakes. Market risk is things that you cannot control. The market is doing something that you thought was not likely. It's fairly common that you'll take a trade where the entry is good, the logic is good, but the market does not do what you think was most likely. That's bad luck instead of a bad trade. It's a good trade that went bad. For example, we have a sell the close market down here. Traders are selling closes, selling closes, selling closes. He knows that eventually one is going to be the final one and that the market will reverse and he'll lose money. Nobody's going to sell all of these closes, but traders will sell at least one. And let's say you sold this one and then immediately you see a bull bar and then three other bull bars. At that point, the trade is no longer a sell the close bear trend and you have to change how you're trading. One thing you might do is sell more higher and then try to get out break even on your first entry and then with the profit on your higher entry. You need some rules to prevent bad trades from becoming very big losses. When the market is swing trading, it's fairly easy to make money trading in the direction of the trend. Markets going up, you buy. Markets going down, you sell. Markets going down, you sell. Look, it's always good for you. As long as it's continuing to trend, it's okay to hold on to your position or to enter at any time in the direction of the trend. Buying here or selling here. First of all, you always need a protective stop. After every strong breakout to a new high, you can trail your stop to the most recent major high or low. Here, a breakout to a new high, you can trail your stop to below this low. If the stop is far away, you have to reduce your position size, or if you're entering at a time when the stop is going to be very far away, you simply have to trade small. Any time there's a reasonable opposite signal, it does not have to be a perfect signal, as long as it's reasonable, it's reasonable for you to get out of your trade. For example, we have a slight higher high, we have a bull trend trading range, and a higher high, therefore it's a higher high major trend reversal, and it's a wedge rally. We went up here, we went down up here, and then down up here, and now we have a bear bar closing on its low. Reasonable to get out of longs if you're still long at this point. You get out on a stop below the low of that bear bar. It's a weak rally, it's a wedge rally, and it's a potential higher high major trend reversal. You've got to be thinking that the market is no longer in a bull channel. It's now either in a trading range or in a bear trend. In addition to exiting if there's a reasonable opposite signal, or if your stop is hit, you exit if there's a strong opposite break up. It can be a single big bear bar if you're long, or it could be three or more bear bars with moderate sized bodies, especially if they're closing on or near their lows. Here we have three bear bars. This one became big. All three closing at or near their lows. Reasonable to get out at the market. As soon as you see that third close, you simply exit at the market. You sell out of your long. It doesn't matter if you bought here or if you bought down here. You get out here if you did not already get out. Every channel eventually stops and usually it becomes a trading range. We have a bull channel became a trading range. We have a bear channel. We have a bull breakout. And it became a bull leg in a larger trading range. The single most important rule to protect yourself is having a stop in the market, not a mental stop, not a stop in your head. If the stop is in the market, it's a guarantee that you will lose no more than an acceptable loss. There are often several choices for a reasonable stop. For example, bulls who bought any time in here could have a stop below the bottom of this leg or below the bottom of the bull trend. And bears who sold any time in here, it's reasonable to put their stop above the top of the bear reversal. After every strong breakout to a new high, it's reasonable to trail your stop. If you bought anywhere in here and then the market breaks out here to a new high and you have several decent bull bars, it's reasonable to put your stop below this low. And for the bears, you have a strong bear breakout, stop up here. And then once it starts to break out again, you can trail your stop, lower your stop down to the most recent major lower high, which is right here, put your stop just above. A great scalper can win 90% of the time. That means he's losing 10% of the time. He needs rules to prevent his losses from getting very big. The first obvious one is always have an appropriate stop in the market. For example, let's say you're a scalper and you think we have one push up, down, up, down. Maybe the third push will be a wedge and a reversal. Markets transitioning to a trading range. He might sell with a limit order at this high, betting that the third leg up will fail and reverse down enough to make a scalp. Different ways to calculate where to put a stop, but one might be just beyond a measured move up based upon the height of this small tight trading range. Let's say a trader bought this close, thinking that it's a strong enough pair of bars so that the market will probably have at least one more leg up. Reasonable stop below the two bar breakout or below the bottom of the leg. Some scalpers would even put a stop down here or here, thinking that maybe the market will have a deep pullback into a trading range. They can buy more lower, confident that it will come back here after two pretty good bull bars. If you're clearly wrong, it's usually better just to exit immediately and don't wait for your stop to be hit. For example, if a bull bought this close and the next bar looked like that, a reversal bar closing near its low, it's a doji bar but it's also a wedge, one, two, three. If the trader is now concerned that we may get a couple of legs sideways to down and he's a scalper, he's going for a small profit. He does not want to have a big risk. Therefore, it's reasonable for him to get out just below the low of this bar and not wait for a stop to get hit. Anytime there's a reasonable opposite signal, it's reasonable to get out. If the opposite signal does not lead to a reversal and it simply becomes a flag and the trend resumes, you can always get back in. For example, let's say you bought this close, hoping that the bull trend will continue. And then on the next bar, you see that reversal. Yet you want to hold and use a reasonable stop here or here. If you did get out, you could always buy again above a bull bar, especially a second entry buy above a bull bar closing on its high. Reasonable to get out here, a large high two rally, one pullback two. Nested, there's a smaller one, one pullback two. Consecutive tops, we have a wedge top here, maybe a wedge top here. One or one and then two pause and three. Good bear bar. If you get out, again, if the market's still always in long, and it is, you can look to buy again after two or three legs sideways to down. One, pullback two, pullback three. A bull bar, reasonable to buy above this bull bar and put your trade back on. If you get out below here, you buy again above here. If you get out below here, you can buy again above that bull bar. When the market's near the end of the session, you have to be prepared to get out faster because sometimes a reversal may not come back to your entry to let you avoid a loss. We have a bear swing, but a slightly higher low. And then we have a small double bottom. Bull bar here, a better bull bar here. And this double bottom is forming a double bottom with this double bottom. So it's a big double bottom with this low and this pair of lows, and it's subdivided into a smaller double bottom. Reasonable to be buying above this bar or buying closes once it becomes a buy the close bull trend. But it's a buy the close bull trend late in the session or late in the day. Whenever that's the case, it's usually good to get out below any bear bar that closes near its low or three or four ticks or three or four pips below any bar, bull bar or bear bar. When you're buying these closes, your stop is here below the low. And you have to get out, I think, below a bear bar closing below its low so you can get out here. A lot of bulls will not get out below this bear doji because it has only a small bear body. The odds are it's going to go up a little bit higher. However, once you've had three or four bars in a buy the close trend at the end of a session or the end of the day, you have to be prepared to get out because usually a buy the close rally at the end of a session will only last four, five or six bars. So once you've had five or six closes in your direction, you have to be prepared for a reversal and therefore be ready to get out. Sometimes there's no good opposite signal to get you out, but you still need some method to get out. For example, one big trend bar is enough to make bears get out before their stop gets hit. Let's say you were using a wide stop up here at the top of this tight bear channel and you're short for any reason and then you see a big bull bar like this. This is a surprise bar. A surprise bar has at least a 60 or 70% chance of at least one more leg up and probably some kind of a measured move up. Therefore, once you see this bar, get out at the market. Don't wait for your stop to get hit. If the market is reversing up strongly even here, you're going to get out at the market before a tight stop here is hit. Once you believe your premise is wrong, get out of your position. Don't rely on your stop. If you're short, get out as the big bar is forming or certainly on the close of the big bar. Whenever you have an exceptional bar like that, there's going to be follow through. So don't rely on your stop. Instead of one big bull bar, if you're short, sometimes you'll see two medium sized bull bars. In that case, usually it's good to get out on the close of the second bar, which would be right here. This is also four bull bars, but two of them have pretty good bodies and they're closing on their highs. So reasonable to get out there and don't rely on a stop to be hit. If you had your stop up here, you're not at the stop, but this is strong enough up. We're probably going higher and therefore your stop is probably going to get hit. If you're short, it's better just to get out by at the market as soon as this bar closes. A lot of traders will simply exit if there are three consecutive bull bars and one or more of them has a good sized body closing on or near its high. If a trader is short, this is a reasonable place to get out as well. If you're long and you see three, four or five small bars, you'll get out on the close of one of the bars, especially if two or three of them are closing near the low. Bulls who are long here get out on the third or fourth or fifth close. Just sell out of their longs at the market. One big bar against you is a good reason to get out. Two medium sized bars against you are reasonable reason to get out. And three, four or five small bars against you are reasonable reason to exit. Don't wait for your stop to be hit. Once you've seen three, four or five bars against you if you're long, your stop is going to get hit. So just get out before your stop is hit. Exit on the third or fourth close, especially the fourth close here, a bigger bar. We're starting to accelerate down. And now we're getting a series of bigger bars. This is the bulls giving up. The market's now reversing this rally. So big up, big down, and the bars are getting good bodies. The bulls are giving up. The bears are taking control. The market is probably going to go lower. It's always in short. Every trend eventually ends and every trend eventually disappoints. Traders hoping that the trend will continue. Sell the closed beer trend. You get a bull bar closing near its high. You got to get out just above the high of the bull bar. A buy the closed bull trend. Disappointed bulls. Reasonable to get out here. Sell the closed bear trend. Well, not really. But if you're a bear, you're certainly disappointed that the breakout is not bigger. The reversal down is not bigger. And the follow through is not bigger. Buy the closed bull trend. It's disappointing all the way up. We have bars with big tails, small bodies. Probably not going to last all that much longer. And then you're certainly going to be disappointed by that big bear bar. Sell the closed bear trend. Disappointment bars. Bull bars. Buy the closed bull trend. Disappointment. Bear bars. Especially bear bars closing on or near their lows. An attempt at a bear reversal. Not convincing. But in any case, if you're a bear, you're disappointed by bull bars. Bull trend. Even though it's about eight bull bars, it's not very strong. And you're certainly going to be concerned by a big bear bar closing near as low. It's disappointing. And it makes you think that the bull trend is ending. And the market might be entering a trading range. Usually a good trader can avoid his loss if he manages his trade well. I talk about this in the videos on entering late and trends. And I'm going to talk a little bit more about it right here. For example, let's say you're treating this like a buy the close bull trend. And you bought one or more of these closes, either for a scalp or a swing. And then you see this bear bar. We're in a bull channel. You look to the left. Bears were sold this high. Made money. Bears were sold this high. Maybe made a little bit of money. Bears were selling above highs all the way up. Not making much, but a pretty good pullback here. If we go to a new high, maybe we'll get another pullback. Bears were sold this high. Made money. They sell that high. They sell more higher. And they get out break even at their first entry and with a profit on their second. Very tight bull channel. Probably a minor reversal, meaning either a bull flag or a trading range. However, if you happen to buy that close, you knew that we've pulled back every time we've broken out to a new high. We're in a channel. We're going to pull back soon. If you see this bear bar, you have to be disappointed. You may have bought the high close of the bull trend. More likely, you bought the high close of the current leg in the bull trend. We have eight consecutive bull bars. First reversal, probably minor. But you have to make decisions on what to do. Easiest approach is to just rely on your stop. And as long as your stop has not been hit and your premise is still good, you can hold on to your position. Strong breakout. New high. This is a major lower high. Reasonable to keep your stop right here. If you bought this close after you saw the disappointment bar, you might have placed an order to get out break-even. And you were unable, unable, unable. Several bars were unable to get out break-even. Buying this close was a reasonable thing to do. Usually if you do something reasonable and you rely on your stop and scale in lower, you can avoid a loss and possibly not. And possibly make a profit. One thing to do is rely on your stop. Place a limit order to get out break-even. Another thing is to buy more the size of a scalp or two to three times the size of a scalp below your first entry. Rely on your stop. And then get out break-even on your first trade and with a profit on your lower trade. We're getting late in the day. A lot of the bulls who did buy here and sat through this are concerned that we might not go much higher. They simply sell out of their longs at their original entry price. Reasonable. Some bulls, as I said, will scale in one times or two times or three times the size of a minimum scalp. Rely on their stop. And then look to get out with a profit on their lower entries and get out break-even at their first entry. You can only do this if you're trading small enough so that your entire position does not expose you to any more risk using this stop than any other trade. If your position is too big to allow you to scale in and use that stop, don't scale in. Disappointment. You get out break-even on your first entry. And if you add it on, you get out with a small profit on your lower entry. Traders scale in for one reason. To increase the probability of a profit. Or to increase the chance of avoiding a loss. It's a thing that experts do. Beginners should never do it because invariably their position will be too big for the stop that they need. They buy here thinking that they're going to scale in. They scale in thinking that they can hold and rely on the stop. And then they do the math and decide that, wow, I didn't think I was going to be risking that much money. They end up selling with a loss rather than managing the trade as they originally planned. They had an unreasonable plan given their skill level, their ability to tolerate the market going against them. And the position size was way too big. A lot of bulls who are looking to scale in will only scale in once. They like to wait for a pullback that is at least two to three times bigger than the minimum scalp size. And a lot of them prefer to buy above a decent bull bar. So for example, a bull might buy here and hope that once it starts to sell off, he gets to buy more. Two to three points or 10 or 20 pips, 30 pips below this first entry, but above a bull bar. For example, this is a good looking bull bar, but it's probably not two to three times the size of a minimum scalp. If a trader bought here thinking that he's disappointed, he wants to buy more lower and it does not go low enough. He simply holds on to his position in case it goes lower and then adds on. If instead it does not go low enough to scale in, he simply gets out break even at his original entry. We have a bear breakout, a pullback, and then a strong bear breakout. A pair of bear bars closing below the low and a follow through bear bar. A doji, not all that good, but good enough breakout, good enough follow through, probably at least a little bit more down and maybe a lot more down. If the bear sells at this close, his stop is above the top of the most recent major lower high, a major lower high. We broke to a new low and there's a reasonably strong breakout, four consecutive bear bars, a good location for the stop. And then he sees this, a micro double bottom, a bull bar, and it's starting to go up. Here we have five bars up without a pullback, but is his premise wrong? Is this now always in long or is it still always in short? This is not enough to make it always in long. This is not enough to make it always in long and therefore it's always in short still and has not hit his stop. So it's reasonable to stay short. You sell here and you sit through this because there's no clear, obvious buy setup. This is not a convincing, obvious buy setup. And the reversal never had three or four strong bull bars. You have three bull bars here, not particularly big. If you want, you could get out on the close of this bar. But if you do, the premise is still valid. You look for a bear bar and you get short again below that low. Even though the reversal up lasted about a dozen bars, the market never clearly became always in long. And therefore it's reasonable to rely on your stop, even though the market is now above your entry price. All traders need rules to avoid big losses. And the single most important rule is to rely on a protective stop that's in the market. Every trend eventually ends and that means how your trading has to change as well. This is Al Brooks. This is the first of two videos on losing when a good trade goes bad. It's the first of two videos on losing when a good trade goes bad. It's the first of two videos on losing when a good trade goes bad. This is Al Brooks. This is a real a bag. Stan for the last two videos on losing when a good trade