 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fourth of five videos on entering late in trends. I'm going to continue a little bit what I talked about in the final slides of the last video about disappointed bears, bears who sell closes and then they get a bar that disappoints them like a bull reversal bar right after they enter. And then I talk about how they get trapped by those disappointment bars at the end of a bear trend and how they then give up. They exit and that creates a give up bar, a bull trend bar, which represents the final bears giving up. We have a spike and pullback and channel bull trend. So spike wedge. And we have a sell off, a weak sell off. It looks like a bear leg in a trading range and therefore will probably go higher. Instead, we got this. We have a bear breakout. Once you have two consecutive big bear bars like this breaking below what should have been support, the market's always in short. The odds are we're going lower, probably for some measure move down. Now we have a third consecutive decent bear bar closing below its midpoint. 60% chance the market will fall for a measured move down, maybe based upon the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar. So 60% chance it will get down here before it gets back up here where the bears have their stops. This is a sell the close market by the second close. By the second close, the market's always in short. 60% chance it will fall for a measured move. 40% chance we will not. The bears who sell for any reason, for example, if they sell this close, 40% chance it's going to get here before it falls for a measured move down. Look at this. We have a bar with a big tail on the bottom, but it does not have a bull close. Some bears will sell that close as well, betting that the reversal will be minor, a bear flag, and that the bear trend will continue down. They don't sell every close, but bears looking to sell, look to sell closes as a very good way to sell in a bear trend. Some bears sell every close and they just keep adding to their position. Most traders sell once, maybe add on one more time. Traders who did not sell here or here might finally decide to sell the close here, confident there's a 60% chance we're going lower before it gets up to their stop level. A lot of bears, when they see a big tail like this, they stop selling. They know we'll get a minor reversal and they'll be able to sell higher. However, some bears will aggressively sell the close all the way down, including the close of this reversal bar, knowing that it does not have a bull body. And the odds are, if it does start to reverse, the reversal will be minor and the bear trend will continue. You can only do that if you can manage your trades correctly and if you can scale in and use the appropriate stops. It sounds easy, but it's not. And this is for advanced traders only. What do you do if you sold that close and now we have a second reversal bar? Yes, there's not a bull body, but it still has a very big tail on the bottom. That tells you that the market went down and people bought and went down again and traders bought again. Bulls bought betting on a higher low compared to the bottom of the bull trend. And a lot of bears bought because they were disappointed by the follow through and they're trying to get out break even or with a small profit depending on where they sold. A lot of the bears who sold this close know there's a big tail on the bottom and that the market might soon begin to transition into a trading range. And therefore, a lot of them are looking to scalp maybe for two points. So they might sell this close and place a limit order to buy back two points lower. And they're willing to scale in higher if it does not get down to their target. This is two points below that close. If a bear sold that close, he puts a limit order two points down, which is right at the low of this bar. And look at the low of this bar. It did not get down to the low of that bar. And therefore, it missed filling the limit order by one tick. It fell eight ticks from that close. Most of the bears have their limit orders eight ticks down and those orders are not filled. 95% of the time it has to go nine ticks for you to exit with eight ticks on a limit order. The market reversed up pretty quickly without filling those orders. If you're a bear scalper who sold this close and looked for a two points profit and it hit your limit order, did not fill you, and now is back to your entry price, what are you going to do? If you're a scalper, you'll probably buy back your short either on the way up or right around your entry price. Why did the market do this? Because too many bears do not believe in the bear trend. The market sold off, went up. Bears started scalping and went down again and went up. Bears are scalping. Instead of holding for a swing trade, they're taking quick profits. And the bulls are buying as well. Now what do you do if you did not exit your short? Think about this for a second. We have a microdouble bottom. Disappointed bears who were hoping to make a two point scalp probably are giving up. Some of the bears who sold this close and then they see this second doji bar, instead of trying for a two points profit, they'll raise their limit order to one point below their entry price. They sold here. They were disappointed that they did not get filled here. They'll then raise their profit target to one point below their entry. And look at the low of this bar. It fell exactly four ticks from their entry and therefore they did not get filled. Just like they did not get filled for two points profit here, they did not get filled for one point profit here. It had to fall five ticks from that close where they sold. It only fell four ticks. Again, it hit their limit order and reversed up. A lot of those bears then would finally give up and try to get out break even and give up trying to make a profit. What's going on now? Well, we're rallying for about eight bars with small pullbacks. A one tick pullback here. The market looks like it's beginning to reverse the sell off. Look at this. This low fell one tick below this close. Some of the bears held short through this and instead of trying for a two point profit or for a one point profit, now after they see this bull bar, if they did not already get out, they're trying to get out break even. And it had to fall one tick below their entry price. They sold here and this low went one tick below their entry price and reversed up. That tells you that a lot of the bears who did not get out earlier are finally getting out. It fell one tick below their entry price. The market allowed them to get out. The bears who did not take the opportunities to get out break even now are starting to look for reasons to get out break even. Now the bears who are still remaining will get out with a loss. For example, they might buy with a limit order below the low of this bull bar betting that it's a low probability sell and there probably are buyers below. Some of those buyers are bears buying back their shorts trying to minimize their loss. Not all of those bears exited and there are always some trapped bears at the end of a bear trend and I want to talk about them right now. The bulls knew that the bars were big enough so that the bears who sold that close were hoping for a two point profit. And then once they were unable to get their two point profit, they'd try for a one point profit. And once they were unable to get their one point profit, they would try to get out break even. If you're a bull and you know that, you know the bears are going to try to buy eight ticks below this bar and then if not filled, they'll try to buy four ticks below that close. Those bulls are placing limit orders a tick or two above where the bears are trying to exit with the profit, trying to keep the bears from making their profit and forcing the bears to buy back their shorts at a higher price, which could lead to a reversal. Some of these bulls who bought either here or here will put their stock right below the micro double bottom. Small risk, usually when your risk is small, the probability of success is small as well. At this point, the market's still always in short and it's still always in short here. So the probability is that we're going lower. However, the risk is small enough and the reward is big enough so that it's still mathematically okay for the bulls to take these buys. They lose most of the time, but the reward is two or three times greater than the risk and it makes the traders equation positive. For example, the bulls who bought here, they knew the bears needed the market to fall five ticks to make a one point profit had they sold this close. Therefore, the bulls placed a limit order to buy two, three or four ticks below that close, hoping that enough other bulls would buy as well, trapping the bears. The bears would then not get their one point profit and they would have to buy back higher. The bulls who did buy here probably would put their stock below the micro double bottom. These bulls are betting on a tight trading range rather than a continued bear trend. They know the reversal is probably minor and the best they'll probably get is a trading range. However, they know also sometimes a minor reversal leads into a major reversal into a bull trend. Usually if you're buying in a bear trend, you're scalping, expecting a trading range. You're expecting the bear trend to end and evolve into a trading range. This is what the bulls see. They see that the market fell for about a measured move based upon the height of this potential bull flag. It's a higher low. It's turning up above the bottom of the bull breakout. And we have a micro double bottom, all good for the bulls. Final bears, most of the final bears will be exiting here with a small loss. They know that we're probably going to begin to enter a trading range. Less likely a major reversal, but probably at least a trading range. And a lot of the bears will get out and give the bulls an opportunity to reverse the market. If after five or 10 bars, the bulls are unable to reverse the market, the bears will sell again for trend resumption down. Some bulls will buy betting that we have a higher low and a measured move target and a micro double bottom. They'll buy on a stop, betting on a swing up, at least to the top of the sell climax. In general, when you have a sell climax like this, you have a 40% chance that the market will get to the top of the sell climax before falling for a measured move down. The bears take the higher probability bet that we're going down for the measured move. The bulls take the lower probability bet, betting that will go up to the top of the sell climax. The bears are starting to give up. The result is every little small pullback, the bears are buying back their shorts. And these are any of the bears who sold anywhere in here or anywhere up here. They're sensing that the market is having an increased probability of a reversal and therefore any small reversal down the bears are selling, trying to minimize their losses or if they bought higher, trying to maximize their profits. When the market's in a strong bear breakout, bears are selling for any reason. A popular way to trade it is to sell closes. However, at some point, you end up selling the final bear close in the bear trend and the market reverses. And those bears will give up. The bears who did not get out for any of those reasons that I talked about earlier have to have a stop. One logical location for a stop is the top of the sell climax or the top of the bear leg. The bears will scale in around that stop level, betting that the market will fall enough so they can get out break even. Let's say a bear sold his clothes. He might sell more below a bear bar here or he might sell more two, three, four points higher, hoping that the market will pull back far enough so that he can exit break even between his two entry prices. If he sold here or if he sold here or here, his average price would be here. He's hoping for a pullback down far enough to exit break even on the trade, avoid loss. As long as the market keeps making lower highs, it's still in a bear trend. However, if it breaks above a major lower high like here or here, then the premise of a bear channel is no longer valid. The market then is either in a trading range or a bull trend. If bears sold on the premise that it's a bear trend and now there's evidence it is not, they'll buy back their shorts. They'll give up. The bears who held on here or other bears who sold here or if they added to their position up here are hoping for a double top with the top of the sell climax or with this lower high. Their stop is not far above. And what does that tell you? If they sell here and the stop is just a little bit above at those black lines, either of those black lines, their risk is very small. Anytime you take a trade where the risk is very small, you're probably going to lose. If you have a fantastic risk reward ratio, which is what you get with a very small risk, chances are you're going to lose. If you have a great risk reward ratio, then you have to have terrible probability, low probability, because otherwise you'd have a perfect trade and perfect trades cannot exist. There always has to be somebody willing to take the other side of your trade. And if your trade has a very high probability of a big profit with very little risk, it's perfect and nobody's going to take the opposite. Therefore, if you're selling here with very little risk, putting a stop just above either of those lines or at either of those lines, you're probably going to lose. But the math is still acceptable to take the short. Not only is the risk small and that alone makes the probability small, the bull channel is very tight. We're probably always in long, which means the probability is we're going higher. And that tight channel further reduces the probability of bears selling just below their stops. What took place here? The market went above the two logical stop areas, the top of the sell climax, the top of the bear leg, and the bears gave up. You also had bulls buying as well, knowing that now the bears no longer think of this as a bear trend. They think of it either as a trading range or a bull trend. Bulls buy on a stop at their stop level or their higher stop level here. They buy the breakout. Some will simply buy at the market. Some will buy the close of that bar. Strong enough breakout, a breakout and a follow through bar, probably at least a small second leg up. And therefore the first reversal down is minor and bulls will buy at the low of that bar, betting that there'll be buyers below and that will continue higher. They buy at the low of that bar and put a stop either below the bottom of the bull breakout or the bottom of the bull leg. Bears are hoping for a trading range. Some bears who are not short here or who bought back their shorts for any reason are betting that the market's in a trading range. We went up, we went down, we've been sideways for 50 or 60 bars. If it's a trading range, traders will buy below bars. They'll buy below this bar and buy more lower, betting that it'll get back above that low. They can get out break even on the first entry and with a profit on their second entry. Bears will do the opposite. They'll sell above bars, betting that whatever breakout we get, they can sell more higher and the market will probably come back below their breakout point. And therefore you will have bears selling at the location where a lot of bears are exiting with stops. Big bull breakout and follow through. If you were a bear and you sold with a stop above this high or above that high, you're probably disappointed by this follow through. And a lot of the bears who took that sell either will sell more higher and try to get out break even in between their two entry prices. Or they'll simply give up, buy back their shorts for a loss. And the result is a pair of bull breakout bars. This is the bears giving up and it's also aggressive bulls buying. Bears buy back their shorts on the first reversal down at the low of that bar, betting that it's probably not going to be a failed bull breakout and the start of a bear trend. It's probably going to be a minor reversal and this is strong enough so that we'll get at least a small second leg up. Other bears would exit on a stop. We have a bull breakout and a pullback. This is a high one buy signal bar. They might buy above the high of that bar. Now we have a high two, a small double bottom. High one, pull back, high two. And they might buy above the high of that bear bar or the high of this bull bar to take a loss, exit with a loss. You know the bulls are always buying. Now we know the bears are buying as well. If both the bulls and bears are buying, the odds are we'll go at least a little bit higher, possibly for a measured move up. We twice tried to reverse down and could not get below the breakout point and could not get below this high. Therefore, this might be a measuring gap for a measured move up. I begin by talking about disappointed bears. For example, if the market's in a strong bear trend and bears are selling closes, and then they get a bar that they think is disappointing and could lead to a reversal. They have to make decisions on how to trade. Bears can get trapped at the end of a bear trend and they have to make decisions on how to either reduce their losses or try to get a small profit. Eventually, traders who are selling closes in a strong bear trend give up. They have to buy back their shorts because eventually every trend ends and it reverses. And traders need to know how to read when a trend is ending. And they also have to know how to give up and how to reduce their losses. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fourth of five videos on entering late in trends. The Brooks Training Course is the fourth of five videos on entering late in trends. Thank you.