 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on gaps. Gaps very often lead to trends if the context is right. However, if gaps are closing in a trend, it's a stair pattern and it's usually a sign that the channel is soon going to evolve into a trading range. This is the Euro versus the dollar five minute chart. Every bear trend bar is also a breakout and a potential climax. Here we have continuation after the bear bar and a pullback that did not overlap below this bar. This is a breakout point. This is a breakout pullback, a test of the breakout point, and it looks like the bear trend might be resuming. Even though you have a lot of small bars and doji bars, it's still a potential sign of strength. If the market starts to form a series of gap bars like this, it usually means the bears are strong and it increases the chances that the market will fall a lot further. We have another bear trend bar. So a gap between this close and that low. A gap between this close and any low. And then the bar after has a bear body that increases the chances that we're going lower. Also, the high of this follow through bar did not get above the breakout point. And therefore, it's another potential gap if the market goes lower and does not go above this breakout point. It increases the chances that this gap between this high and that low could lead to a measured move down. Top of the bear trend. Measuring gap. Measured move down. The bears look at these gaps. We have a gap here and a gap here. The bears look at the gaps as a sign of strength and they're hoping that we're getting a small pullback bear trend. And if so, it could last a long time. If you have a bear trend that lacks consecutive big bear trend bars. In other words, it does not look very strong. It looks like it might be a bear leg in a trading range. But it's forming two or three gaps. Gap. Gap. You've got to be thinking it could be a small pullback bear trend, which is one of the strongest types of bear trends. And it can last a long time. And you can see we've got vacuumed down in a cell climax to the measure move target based upon the top of the bear trend to this gap. This is the biggest bear bar occurring late in a bear trend. And therefore, there's an increased chance of it being an exhaustive end of the trend. However, it's occurring in a small pullback bear trend. A gap here. A gap here. A very tight bear channel. This is more likely going to be a measuring gap. The bull's got a bull follow through bar. So possibly a reversal up and this will be an exhaustive end of the trend. But when the channel is as tight as this and it's a small pullback bear trend. One bar pullback. One bar pullback. It's more likely that we're going at least a little bit lower and possibly this could be a measuring gap and we could fall for a measure move down. This is not a good buy. This is not a good bet on an exhaustion gap. It's a possible exhaustion gap. A possible failed breakout. But it's better not to buy until after you see a strong reversal up. Because the bear channel is so tight. Any reversal here is probably minor. Which means a bear flag. Maybe a trading range. This bull bar and this tail in part is caused by bears taking profits at the measured move target. However, a lot of bears are betting this is a small pullback bear trend and they're going to sell any reversal. Here the market could reverse up only for three small bars. Here only one bar. Here only one bar. Chances are if we try to reverse here, bears will sell any small pullback and the bear trend will resume. At the moment, we have another potential gap. The high of this pullback bar and the low of this breakout point. It could lead to a measured move down. Again, whenever a channel is extremely tight and the pullbacks are small and brief, even if you get an exhaustive bar like this, it's still more likely to lead to a measured move down than it is to lead to a reversal. You have to be looking to sell. Gap between the high of the pullback and the low of the breakout point. Getting follow through, but it's still a small pullback bear trend. The pullbacks are small. The sell-up does not look strong. It lacks consecutive big bear trend bars. But these gaps are a warning that this could last a long time. Bulls could not close the gap despite that bull bar. This bigger bear bar is a sign that a lot of the bulls betting on an exhaustion gap are selling out with a loss. The bulls are giving up. And if the bulls give up, they're probably going to go lower before they'll buy again. The bear trend lasted through the end of the session. And this looks like it's probably a measuring gap from the top of the bull trend, middle of this gap, down to the end of the session. And in fact, it was a measuring gap. And at the end of the session, the bears took profits. Not enough time left for the bulls to make any money buying. Also, it's still a small pullback bear trend. Not worth buying. Would bulls buy for a scallop? I would not. We're starting to get a lot of small bars. Starting to enter a tight trading range. At the end of the U.S. session, dead money. The chance of a profitable buy is small. But the bears are buying to buy back their shorts at the end of the session. Bear trend. We have a series of gaps. This high, that low. This pullback, that breakout point. These pullbacks, that low. This high, that low. Even though these bars went above this low, they did not go above the low of the bar before the bear breakout. Therefore, it's still a sign of strength. Not as good a sign of strength as these other gaps where there's no overlap, but still a sign of strength. And as long as the market is forming a series of gaps, it's better to only look to sell. If you look at a slightly higher timeframe, this would simply be a series of big bear bars and there would be no pullbacks. This is still a very tight bear channel and therefore a breakout on the next higher timeframe. And if the market's in a breakout phase, traders should not be looking to buy. You should only sell for any reason. When you see a lot of open gaps, two, three, four gaps, you cannot buy. You can only sell. I've been talking about gaps that stay open. Now I'm going to talk about stairs. And by stairs, I mean gaps that close. The gap is open here. We have a triangle. We went up, we went down, we went up, we went down, we went up in a tight trading range. Higher lows, lower highs. Traders pay attention to this. We have a gap, maybe an exhaustive end of the trend, maybe a measurement gap. Well, at this point, we know the gap closed. That tells you that the bulls are getting pretty strong. Big down, big up. Unlikely to go from a tight bear channel into a bull trend, but it might start to transition either into a broad bear channel or a trading range. It's a sign of strong bulls. Because the bulls are getting stronger, unlike a tight bear channel where you should never buy, bulls will buy at and below prior lows. We closed the gap. We had a gap between this low and these pullback attempts. And then the gap closed. It's around a 50% pullback of the most recent bear leg. So bears will sell strong bull closes in the middle of the most recent bear leg, betting that any reversal up from a tight bear channel will be minor and not a bull trend. By minor, it will either become a bear flag or a trading range. In either case, if they sell and sell more higher, they should be able to make money. The key point on this slide is we have a closed gap. And therefore, if the bear trend continues, we're in a stairs pattern where gaps close. If gaps are closing, bulls know if they buy at a new low or lower, the market will rally back above the breakout point and they can make money. Bulls hoping for a major reversal. There is no major reversal. It's not a clear wedge bottom. It's not a major trend reversal. It's a minor reversal. It's a strong minor reversal in a tight bear channel. But it's still a minor reversal. And that means the odds are it will either be part of a trading range or a bear flag leading to a resumption of the bear trend. Bulls are buying here, not up here. Everybody's going to be selling here. Bulls will sell to take profits and bears will sell 50% pullback. Betting it's a minor reversal and that the bear trend will continue or that it'll be a trading range and will test down near the bottom. Terrible follow through for the bulls hoping for a major reversal. Bears will sell below this bear bar. Bulls will sell out of lungs below this bull bar. But we have a closed gap this low and this low. We close the gap. Therefore, bulls expect that if we go to a new low, we'll come back above the breakout point. So bulls will start buying new lows and scaling in lower, betting that they can make money scalping again here. Bulls are not going to buy up here at the top of a minor reversal. However, a strong enough minor reversal so that bulls are expecting the bear trend now, instead of being in a tight bear channel, to be in a broader bear channel, a stairs pattern. And they'll buy at a prior low and add on more lower, looking for at least a scalp. Breakout, pull back. Breakout, pull back above the breakout point. Broke below that low, pull back above the low. Gaps are closing. Therefore, it's a stairs pattern. The gaps are not staying open. The bear trend is not as strong. And bulls will start to buy for scalps at and below prior lows. They're willing to buy. If it goes down more, they'll buy more lower. They'll scale in. And bears are no longer selling breakouts. It broke to a new low. Instead of the bears selling, the bears are buying. The bears now have switched. Instead of selling at any time, including a breakout below a prior low, the bears are switching. Now they're selling with limit orders above bars, betting that we're now in a channel phase. The bulls who bought this low, it probably bounced far enough up for them to make a scalp. The same here. Maybe they made a scalp. The bulls who bought at this low with a limit order made a scalp. If bulls are making money in a bear trend, there's something wrong with a bear trend. Usually it's a sign that the bear trend is going to soon transition into a trading range or possibly even into a bull trend. This is a high four buy setup. High one, high two. Bear breakout. And then high one, high two. So high one, high two. High three, high four. Consecutive bottom attempts. We tried to get high two buy here. It failed. Strong enough breakout for at least a second leg down, which we got. And now we have another double bottom attempt. Consecutive bottoms. Bottom attempt here. Failed with four strong bear bars. And then we got a second leg down. Now we have a double bottom attempt here. Higher probability that we're going to get ten bars, two legs sideways, two up. And in fact, we got a lot of bars up. 40 or 50 bars up. On the way up, look at this. A bear bar, but its low stayed above the high of a prior bar. Here we have a bear reversal attempt, but the low stayed above that high. And the same with over here. Maybe this overlapped a little bit here. I can't tell. So it's either still a gap or a negative gap. A sign of strong bulls. And gaps, gaps. This trend is probably going higher. When the bears cannot make money selling at and above prior highs, then only the bulls are making money. Traders can buy, and they should buy for any reason. Gaps, if they stay open, often lead to trends. Especially, for example, if you're getting gaps in a bull trend and the pullbacks are all small. Even if the trend looks weak, it could be a small pullback bull trend and last a long time. Therefore, whenever you see a weak-looking trend, but there are gaps in it, the trend might last a lot longer than what you think. On the other hand, if you have a stairs pattern, if all the gaps are closing, traders will start to scalp against the trend. For example, if you have a bear trend and you have a gap and then it closes in the next bar or the next few bars, bears are buying back their shorts at new lows. They are not confident that the trend is going to continue much longer. And bulls are buying at and below prior lows. If the bulls can start to make money in a bear trend buying a breakout to a new low, the bear trend is probably not going to last much longer. Stairs patterns are a sign that a trend is weakening and probably transitioning into a trading range and possibly an opposite trend. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fourth of four videos on gaps. We're not parents scouting. Oh there's Q-19 one gaps. Here's a bit of Jeffrey Achiger.