 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on triangles. Sometimes triangles expand. The legs get bigger instead of smaller, expanding triangles. And sometimes the patterns do not look quite right. The worse they look, the less reliable they are. A triangle is a trading range that has three reversals. Most triangles have converging lines, but sometimes the legs get bigger. Some traders would call it a megaphone pattern because it looks like a megaphone. Again, as soon as you see five reversals, it's a triangle. Reversal up, reversal up, starting to reverse up, reversal down, reversal down. So three reversals in one direction, total of at least five reversals. It looks like a megaphone. It's an expanding triangle. It's a trading range. Therefore, it's a channel. It has two lines, one below, one above. And here the lines are expanding. And therefore, it's an expanding triangle. An expanding triangle, if the pattern is big enough, contains 15, 20, 30 bars, it's always also a major trend reversal. Here it's a lower low major trend reversal. You can call it a double bottom, but it's slightly lower low. Again, if it's a trading range that's not tight, has at least three legs in one direction. One, two, three. And the pattern is not small. If it has 10 or more bars, 15, 20 bars, the expanding triangle is also a major trend reversal. Lower low, major trend reversal. Bare trend, strong goal, breakout, and then lower low, major trend reversal. Whenever you have an expanding triangle, either the second leg breaks strongly above a bear trend line, or the third leg breaks strongly above a bear trend line. And therefore, you've got to be thinking about a possible major reversal. We have a test of the low, and we have a successful reversal. You can call this a lower low major trend reversal as well. Bare trend, bull breakout, test down to a lower low, maybe a wedge. One, two, three. It's a reasonable buy. However, we failed on the breakout above this high, collapsed strongly, and got a new low. Two legs down, one, pull back, two. A bull inside bar. It's a reasonable buy. Taking a chance that it is a lower low major trend reversal. In this particular case, it's also an expanding triangle. Traders will look to bind the reversal up. You can call it either a lower low major trend reversal or an expanding triangle bottom. Every expanding triangle bottom is a lower low major trend reversal. Whenever you have an expanding triangle reversal, and then the market gets to the opposite side, it usually tries to form a bigger expanding triangle. We have an expanding triangle bottom. We broke above the top of the triangle, tried to reverse down, tried to reverse down a second time. This is an expanding triangle top after an expanding triangle bottom. We have a trading range lasting more than 20 bars, lasted about 100 bars. It's in breakout mode. 50-50 chance there will be a successful bull breakout. 50-50 chance there will be a successful bear breakout. It's a fairly tight range. All trading ranges have both reasonable buy and sell setups within them. They also have many ways to draw the patterns. Reversal up, reversal up, reversal up, reversal up. And we have a slightly higher high. You can see an expanding triangle here. One, two, three, four, five. Two attempts up. One, two. This is a reasonable buy. Anytime you have an expanding triangle bottom and the market breaks above the top, you have to be thinking that it will become an expanding triangle top. The patterns can grow. Sometimes you'll get seven or eight legs instead of just five. Eventually, the expanding triangle pattern ends and it becomes something else. A trading range or a bull trend or a bear trend. Whenever the market's in a trading range, here the range is pretty tight. There are always multiple ways to draw patterns. Most of the reversals are minor. For example, is this rally strong enough so that when we get a test of the low, you'll get a major reversal? Probably not. It's not clear at all. Usually when you have a tight trading range, it's more important than any pattern that you see within it. And most likely the market will continue sideways. Eventually it will break out. But all of the breakout attempts have an 80% chance of failing. We're trying to get a bull breakout and then we try to get a bear breakout. And the tight trading range is going on, just adding more and more bars as it normally does. Higher low major trend reversal. A very strong reversal up. We have an attempt at a higher low here, again here, again here, again here, again here. Many attempts, but most reversal patterns fail within tight trading ranges. But remember my 80% rule. When the market's sideways, 80% chance breakout attempts and reversal attempts will fail and the market will continue sideways. Obviously every trading range eventually breaks out at some point. But looking at any one reversal attempt or any one breakout attempt, 80% chance it's going to fail. Expanding triangle, different ways to draw it. We have five pushes here. We tried to get the bear breakout instead. It became an expanding triangle bull flag. And we got another bull breakout and then another reversal. Is this a big enough pattern for a major trend reversal? This is probably not. It could be major, but it's probably minor. This is probably big enough. We have a pretty strong bull breakout and a very strong reversal. This has a better chance of being a major reversal. Leg four only had about 10 bars. Mostly in a tight trading range. The bars are small. Therefore, this is probably a minor reversal. You can argue it's a bull trend. You don't see the bars to the left. You see some rally here. This is probably going to be a minor reversal and the trading range will continue. On the other hand, this could be a big enough pattern for a major reversal there. Bears will sell the reversal down. Here we have a pullback. A double top lower high. Traders will sell below that bar as well, taking a chance that we get the breakout. If you want a higher probability trade, you wait until there is a strong breakout. Here we have consecutive bear bars. Big bear bars closing on its low. This is the bulls giving up. Traders agree that the price is too high. The market has to go down to find buyers. Higher probability sell, selling here compared to here. Different computers see different things and they label it differently. Some computers are looking for double tops. They see a double top. They see another double top here and here. Maybe they call this a double top. A double bottom bull flag. Another double bottom bull flag. It doesn't matter how you label it. It's still a very tight range at this point. Breakout mode. The computers will trade it the same no matter how they label it. Traders are looking to sell reversals down and buy reversals up. Strong breakout below a trading range, which is also an expanding triangle top. It had a pretty good reversal down. Strong bull breakout. This looks like a possible final breakout attempt on the part of the bulls and it reversed down strongly. Some computers will say double top here and here. Neckline of the double top and we broke strongly below the neckline. And they'll start looking to sell. Here a small double top bear flag. Push up. Push up. And then a bear bar. The original check, to the fato okay to whatθ? You quickly refresh in yourogeneity. The next page. You get smaller versions of the pattern. Very little call. There is a little rough exist, but the time frame changes in the sky. And it makes the total go straight. You really have this? You're already intended. an even bigger expanding triangle top. So it's a nested expanding triangle top, has a slightly higher probability of success. It's also nested into a larger expanding triangle top. So a small expanding triangle, a medium expanding triangle top, and a very big expanding triangle top. That increases the chances that this reversal down will be profitable for the bears. Expanding triangle top often evolves into an expanding triangle bull flag, and most expanding triangle bottoms usually evolve into expanding triangle bear flags. We have an expanding triangle bottom, or a bull flag, we don't know what came to the left. If it was in a bear trend, this is an expanding triangle bottom. If there was a bull trend over here, this is an expanding triangle bull flag. You buy the reversal up in either case. And now we have another reversal down. Very tight channel. You can take that short, higher probability to sell here. Three pushes up, one, two, three. It's a double top, a second entry short. Some traders will take the first reversal down, others will wait to sell the second reversal down. Expanding triangle bottom or bull flag. And now we have an expanding triangle top. Another reversal up, a larger expanding triangle bottom. Now we have an expanding triangle with seven legs. That's less common than five legs. Sometimes you get a pattern with nine legs, which is even less common. Eventually the market stops creating expanding triangle reversals and it moves on to create some other pattern. As it did here. The expanding triangle pattern ended. Another expanding triangle, micro double bottom, down, up, down, up. Spike and channel, spike pullback parabolic channel. Traders will buy above that bull bar. Many different ways to label a pattern. Some traders will say, the expanding triangle began here with this reversal up. Other computers will say, it began with this reversal down. It could be the sixth leg in the triangle or it could be the seventh leg in the triangle. Doesn't matter, you trade it the same. We have an expansion pattern and a reversal with a good signal bar and a micro double bottom. Traders will buy the reversal up. It's important to pay attention to what the market's doing. It's continuing to reverse after every new high and every new low. And therefore you should look to buy a reversal up from a new low. You have to be ready to trade. When it gets above a prior high, look for sales. When it gets below a prior low, look to buy. Because that's what the market has been doing. Every breakout has been failing and reversing. And there's a low low, a bigger trend. We can't see what the market was doing over here to the left. But if it was in a bear trend and then we got this pattern, this would be an expanding triangle bottom, which is always a lower low, major trend reversal. If the pattern was a bull trend, then this is an expanding triangle, bull flag. In either case, traders are going to buy a reversal up, especially above a bull bar, especially when it's a second reversal up. We reverse up here, pull back again, and now we have a bull bar for a high two buy. High one above this bear bar, high two above this bull bar. Traders will buy the reversal up. Stop just below. The minimum objective, the top of the triangle, or some other resistance level, which we do not yet have. You can always look for measured moves. A very strong first leg up. A little bit of a pull back below that breakout point, but still a possible negative gap that could lead to a measured move, which it did. Bulls take profits there, or they'll take profits on the reversal down, and bears will look to sell. Top of an expanding triangle pattern. Bears will sell either the first reversal down, or they'll be concerned by the number of good bull bars here. Some bears will sell the second reversal down instead. It's a double top and a wedge. Three pushes up. One bear bar. Two doji bar. And then three or four. Other traders will wait for the strong reversal down, and then sell the pull back. Here we have an I-I with a bear bar, so they'll sell below that low, betting that this is going to be a successful double top. Double top, neckline, measured move down, maybe down to a new low, and a bigger expanding triangle. If you take the short here or here, stop just above the top of the pattern. Some objective, at least initially, a new low in the pattern, or maybe some kind of a measured move. We have a double top, neckline, possible measured move down. We have a very strong breakout, maybe measured move down. Traders will look to take profits at those targets, or on the reversal up. And bulls will buy on the reversal up. Finally, I want to talk about patterns that don't look quite right. The better a pattern looks, the more likely it will behave the way you expect it to behave. If it looks bad, it's probably not going to behave the way you expect it to behave. The better a pattern looks, the more likely it will work the way you expect it to work. Is this an expanding triangle here or here? I don't know. The spacing is bad. Only a few bars between points 1 and 3, and then a lot of bars between 3 and 5. When that happens, most computers ignore that pattern and look for something else, anything else. Leg 2 only has 2 bars, and then leg 4 has 50 bars. It's more of a tight training range than an expanding triangle, and therefore this is not a very good looking leg 5, and neither is this. They're more likely the start of bare flags and a bare trend than a reversal pattern. In other words, a minor reversal creating a bare flag is more likely than an expanding triangle, a major reversal. Computers ignore bad looking patterns. They'll always look at it as something else rather than an expanding triangle. Bad looking patterns, therefore, are low probability. They are as bad as having no pattern at all. So do not trade patterns that look bad. Again, we have a symmetry issue here. The spacing between points 1 and 3 is small compared to the space between 3 and 5. You cannot have tiny legs at the start of the pattern and then a very big leg, a lot of bars in the final leg. It's useless. No one's going to be trading it, and if the computers and traders are not trading it as an expanding triangle top, you will not get a reversal. The reversal will be minor and become a bull flag. We have a very strong breakout. Possibly the computers will see this bare channel as a bull flag, and this is the breakout of the flag. It's more likely going to be a measuring gap leading to a measured move up than an exhaustion gap leading to a reversal down. Possible wedge bull flag. Three pushes down. One, two, three. Strong bull breakout. A slightly higher low. You can call it a big high two. Two legs down. One, pull back. Two. You can call it a wedge bull flag. In any case, it's probably a pullback from this breakout. It's a slightly higher low. Traders will assume there will be at least a small second leg up. Whenever you get a strong breakout, the market cycle starts over. You look for a pullback, and then a channel, and then a trading range. I began by talking about triangles where the legs get bigger and the lines diverge an expanding triangle. If the pattern is big enough late in a trend, it can be a major trend reversal as well. It's really important to pay attention to how patterns look. If a pattern does not look good to you, it's not going to look good to the computers. And if they are not trading the pattern, there's not going to be enough money going into the pattern, and therefore the pattern will be useless. It will not do what you think it should do. So, we have two videos on triangles. And then if you use historic car You'll sign in this side. You seearshang or velocity rumors during the convention. And you execute it up like a single performer and a handle from you onama. I'm an indicator Deaf guy who's been trained with a future manager small and I'm the officer of the team who's been conceding along above that hotel, this 25th time.