 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the second of four videos on reversals. A reversal is the earliest entry into a trend. The risk is smaller because you're buying either at the bottom of a bull or selling at the top of a bear, but the probability is low, at least initially. My 80% rule, 80% of the time if you're trying to break out of a trading range, the breakout is going to fail. I also want to describe a pattern that you'll sometimes hear referenced, a cup and handle pattern. What that means is the market's having a reversal and then a pullback from the reversal. The reversal is the cup and the pullback is the handle. The advantage of entering on the first reversal is that the risk is small. It's the smallest that you're going to have in the entire trend. For example, selling up here. The risk is relatively small compared to the reward. However, the probability is usually lower as well. It's higher probability to trade after the trend has begun. But at that point, the stop is further away. Once you see a trend is underway, once you see that the market is clearly always in long, it's never too late to enter. The reversal entry, for example, down here or reversal up here is just one of many ways. There are lots of other good ways to enter a trend. Three or four pushes down, one or one, two and three. So it's a wedge bottom. You can also call it a lower low major trend reversal. You got a bear trend, a bull breakout, a lower low. The earliest entry, it's the reversal setup, either above this micro double bottom or above this bull bar and you get filled right there. However, there are lots of other opportunities to enter a trend. The reversal entry is the first, but there are always many ways to enter a trend. Here we have a high two bull flag and a double bottom. We have a buy climax, a test of the bottom of the buy climax, a reversal up with a good looking bull bar. You can buy above the high of that bar and get filled here. A very strong breakout, a surprise bar. Surprise bars usually have follow through. You can buy the close. Strong follow through bar. The odds are we're going higher. An attempt at a reversal. Chances are the reversal will fail after such a strong trend. So traders will buy that low, betting that the bear breakout will fail. A high two buy. We trade it up here, high one. And then buy above this bull bar, high two. Stop down here, stop down here, stop down here. The stop is far away. However, the probability is very high. A high three. High one above this bar, high two above this bar. And now we have a high three buy. A wedge, one, two, three. Wedge bull flag. Buy above the high of that buy signal bar. Get filled right here. A bull breakout and a small pause. A high one bull flag. Buy above the high of that bar. Clearly three pushes up. One, two, three. The earliest entry for the bears. It's selling with a stop below the reversal bar. Outside down closing on its low. The probability is not yet high. The market might go sideways instead of down. However, the math is good because the potential reward is much bigger than the risk. And that more than offsets the probability. If you don't take that entry, don't worry about it. There are lots of other entries. We have four bars down. Three with bear bars closing on their lows. Sell below the low of this bear inside bar. We have an attempt to reverse up. But we have six bars down. Five with good bear bars. The reversal is probably going to fail. Sell with a limit order at the high of that bar and get filled here. Here we have a bull bar. Pull back in a very tight bear channel. You sell below the low of that bar. We have a rally. We have a low too short. Double top here and here. Or double top here and here with other computers. Sell below the low of that bar. Another double top. Here and here. Sell below the low of this bar. Another double top. Or a wedge bear flag. Strong push up. Second push up. Third push up. Sell below that bar. A surprisingly strong bear breakout. Four consecutive bear bars start selling closes here or here or here. The reversal entry is the earliest entry. Just like on the bottom, the reversal entry is the earliest entry. But not the highest probability. The reversal entry is the lowest entry. The reversal entry is the lowest entry. We have a high. Higher high. We have a higher low. Another higher low. And that's a bull trend. And whenever there's a trend and there are pullbacks, you can always construct a channel. The bull trend, it's going up, has higher highs, higher lows. You can always make a channel. To reverse to a bear trend, you need a breakout below the bull channel, below the bull trend line. And then you need to get a series of lower highs and lower lows. Lower lows, lower highs. As soon as there's a break below the bottom of the channel, below the bottom of the bull trend line, bears look for a reversal down from a lower high. For example here, lower high, major trend reversal, head and shoulder stop. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. After such a strong initial sell off, the odds are high. The first reversal up will fail. You have bulls who did not exit and now are holding a big loss. They're hoping for any kind of a bounce so that they can sell out with a smaller loss. You have bears who did not take the earlier entries and they're eager to sell. They'll sell the first rally expecting at least a second leg down. The result is a lower high after a strong bear breakout usually leads to at least a small second leg. It's a higher probability trade. A bear trend, it has lower highs and lower lows and it's in a channel. Channels tend to become flatter and broader as time goes on. And every time you break above an old line, you draw a new line. We have a new reversal down, we can draw a new line. It broke above that line. It broke above this line. And then we got a new reversal down. You draw this line. With every piece of additional information, redraw lines. A bull trend has inertia. That means it tends to continue what it's doing. In other words, the trend tends to continue. Most resistance will fail. The market is ignoring resistance and it goes beyond one and then it looks at the next resistance level. And it usually fails as well. We're starting to reverse up. Very strong breakout above this lower high resistance. Remember, this is a bear trend as long as it's making lower highs and lower lows. If it goes above a major lower high like this, it's no longer a bear trend. It's either a trading range or a bull trend. This is a potential double top and resistance. It's a strong rally. The market totally ignored that resistance. It broke strongly above the double top. It broke strongly above the trading range. We had a double top here, top of a trading range. Maybe it's forming a wedge top. We have one reversal down, a second reversal down. That allows us to draw a line. Maybe it will reverse down at the line. No. The top of the channel, potential channel, it failed and the market broke strongly above it. We have a measured move target. We have a double bottom, a neckline, and a measured move. The market ignored the measured move target and went strongly above that as well. Potential double top, the market ignored it. I said a strong trend, a strong bull trend ignores resistance. A strong bear trend ignores support. However, all bull trends finally end at resistance. So it's important to keep looking. A wedge, one, two, three. Another way to draw it, one, two, three. So we have a potential wedge top up here. We have a pullback here. This low stayed above this high. So we have a potential measured move up from this high. Here's the bottom of the move. Here's the breakout point. Measured move comes in right there. We have a trading range. A market, when it breaks above a range, often goes up for a measured move. The bottom of the range, top of the range, measured move. So we have a wedge top and two different measured move projections. And we have a decent sell signal bar. Bear trend. It also has inertia. It also tends to continue to do what it has been doing. If it's going down, it tends to continue down and support will fail. The bulls hope for a potential global bottom. They started to get it, but we reversed down. Remember, this is a bull trend as long as it's making higher lows. Here we have a major higher low, a strong breakout to a new high. Yet the market fell below that major higher low. Therefore, the bull trend is probably over and the market is then either in a trading range or a bear trend. Initially, it's a trading range and a bear trend, but you don't know which will ultimately prevail. Here, a bear trend prevailed. This is support. It could be a breakout test of this breakout point. It could be a double bottom with this prior low. Yet the market broke below it. Another prior low. They bought at this price level. When it came down here, it fell below it. They ultimately bought a little bit below it, but they could not rally it enough to go above a major lower high. So it's still in a bear trend. Wedge bottom at support. A breakout point a little bit below. This theoretically is support. A wedge bull flag. We have a bull trend. A pullback in three pushes. One, two, three. Testing a prior high. Around a 50% pullback of the entire bull trend. So there is support here. And the bulls are trying to reverse up. Yet the market keeps falling through every support level. Wedge bottom. One, two, three. Double bottom here. Potential support. Trying to reverse up. The market continues to fall through support. A bear trend. A bear trend. Potential support here. We have a spike, pullback, second push, third push. It's a spike in channel bull trend. Spike, pullback, channel. Usually the bottom of the channel is support. The market fell through that as well. Most support fails in a bear trend. However, all bear trends finally end at support. That means it's important to keep looking for support. And then watching how the market behaves as support. Another wedge bottom. We had one, two, three. That bottom failed. We had one, two, three. That bottom failed. And now we're getting a bear breakout below a bear channel. You can call it three pushes, four pushes, five pushes. Doesn't matter. Three or more pushes. It's a potential wedge. And we're getting a strong bear breakout below a wedge bottom. Also look at the size of this breakout. It's the strongest move late in a bear trend. It's about 50 bars into the bear trend. Any time you see the biggest bear bars coming, 20 or more bars into a bear trend, the bear breakout more likely is an exhaustion gap than a measuring gap. It's more likely the end of a move than the start of a new stronger move down. Bear breakout below bear channel. 75% chance the market's going to reverse up within five bars. The biggest bear breakout late in a bear trend. Chances are the market's going to reverse. We had a potential double bottom here and the market fell below that double bottom. Potential measured move. We're also right above a prior important higher low, the bottom of the entire bull trend. Bulls will try to create a double bottom around that low. And if the bulls are strong, they'll try to keep the double bottom above the prior low and create a slightly higher low double bottom, which it did. We have a bull trend, a reversal attempt. But the trend continued. A bull trend, a reversal attempt. But the trend continued. Any time you have a reversal attempt and a bull trend and the trend resumes, that reversal attempt is a bull flag. So a bull flag. So a bull flag. Reversal attempt. But the trend continued. Bull flag. There are several things needed for a bull trend to end. The first is you need a break below the bottom of the channel. A break below the bull trend line. And you need the pullback to fall below a major higher low. For example, we have a higher low here with a very strong reversal up to a new high. So it's a major higher low. And yet we broke below it. Once it breaks below a major higher low, the bull trend is no longer in effect. The market's either in a trading range or in a bear trend. Realty isOME In Last Vaccines I just talked about how in a strong, bold trend most resistance fails. 80% of the » soft calmerers« trades. They're always looking for reversals. Reversal down, they sell. Reversal down, they sell. When you're selling reversals in a strong bull trend, you can sometimes make money if you're careful about your trade selection and your management, but it's only a scalp. Strong bear breakout below a major higher low. Some bulls will buy the reversal. They'll buy the reversal. Break up below a prior low. Break up below a prior low. They'll buy the reversal. But when you're in a bear trend and you're buying, you're buying only for a scalp because most reversals will fail in a strong trend. For example, a bear who sold here, if he did not scalp out, the market tried to go back up here. It went down a little bit more. It's trying to go back up a second time, a high two bull flag. Whenever you're in a bull trend, especially a reasonably strong bull trend, and you get a high two buy setup with a good-looking buy signal bar, the bears get out above that buy bar. And the bulls buy, expecting a resumption of the trend. This is a high three. The bears who shorted here, if they did not scalp out, they'll get out above either this high two or this high three. This is a surprise bear bar, probably at least a small second leg down. They got it. Some bears would hold short, even though a high two triggered here because this bear bar is so big, probably at least a little bit more down. However, now we have a wedge bull flag, three pushes down, one, two, three. Bears will get out above its high. Now we have a bear trend. We have a low one short here. Some bulls buy here looking for a scalp. Maybe a reversal up from this low, maybe a 50% pullback from this bear trend, and they'll look to scalp out around a 50% pullback. However, if they did not exit with their scalp, and now we're getting a low two short, low one below this bar, low two below this bar, and the low two sell signal bar is a bear bar, bulls will sell, and there's a high probability that we're going lower. Two pushes up, bull bars, bear bar, bull bars, and now we've got a bear II, a pretty good looking bear bar. Traders will sell below the low of that bar or the low of this bear bar. The bulls will sell because they'll know the odds are high we're going down, and the bears will sell for the same reason. They have a lower high and a bear trend, a low two short with a good sell signal bar. Very good trade. Strong reversal up from a wedge bottom. We've got three pushes up, one, two, three. A low two short, maybe we'll get a third push up. This reversal up is strong, the second leg is strong. Some bulls might be willing to hold just in case this wedge bottom leads to a test of the old high. However, we're getting a lower high here. We have a wedge, three pushes up, one, two, three. A wedge lower high, so it's a wedge bear flag, and we have a pretty good bear bar here. The bulls who bought here, if they are still holding long, they'll get out below that wedge bear flag, and the bears who are flat will sell it. They'll bet on another lower high and a bear trend, and they'll bet the reversal attempt will fail, and they'll see this as a wedge bear flag with a good looking sell signal bar. A lot of traders like to take trades where the reward is much bigger than the risk, at least twice as big as the risk. Whenever you have a very strong risk-reward profile like that, a reward twice as big as the risk, you always have a relatively low probability. There has to be a reason for some institution to take the other side of your trade. If you have very strong risk-reward, you have to have lower probability because that institution who's taking the other side needs something. If they have bad risk-reward, they have to have pretty good probability. Reversal trades in general are low probability trades, but the stop is not far, so the risk is small, and you might be entering at the beginning of a big trend, so the reward is very big. Very big risk-reward, very strong risk-reward, much bigger than risk, but the probability is only about 40% when you have a good looking reversal setup. However, the reward being so much bigger than the risk more than offsets the relatively low probability, and the trade is still good. For example, the bears are sold here. The risk is small compared to the reward. Probability, not all that high. More likely, we're going to go sideways, yet we went down a long way, and it became a very good trade. Some bears would take their profits here. We have a wedge bottom and a higher low compared to the original bull trend. Others will take their profit here after a huge sell climax. In either case, the reward for the bears here or here is many times bigger than their initial risk. Some traders want to trade reversals, but they want higher probability. Those traders wait for the strong breakout into the new trend. At that point, the probability of profit is 60%, sometimes even higher if the breakout is strong and the context is good. For example, this is a low-risk trade with lower probability. Stop above the high of the sell signal bar. Yet, if you sell here after two big bear bars closing on their lows, or here at the bottom of a six-bar bear micro channel, or here, you have a higher probability of making money, but your stop is still up here. The risk is greater, and there's less profit potential remaining in the trade. So, smaller reward, greater risk, and that always accompanies higher probability. Whenever you're waiting to enter later, once the probability is higher, you're always going to have a worse risk-reward profile. Because if you're having a high probability of profit, the institution taking the other side of the trade needs good risk-reward, which usually means the stop is further away. If you wait to enter when the probability is high, usually the stop is further away. It doesn't matter whether you take the lower probability early entry, or the higher probability later entries. Both have positive traders equations, and therefore are good trades. Remember, there are no perfect trades. At least one variable has to be bad, even for the best trades. Risk-reward probability, you cannot have all three in your favor. There's no such thing as a high probability trade with very low risk and very big profit potential. That cannot exist, because as soon as the trade started to approach perfection, everyone would take it, and there would be no one left to take the other side of the trade, and the trade would fail. I'm going to talk now a little bit about the cup and handle pattern, where you have a reversal that's sometimes referred to as a cup, and then a pullback from the reversal, and that's sometimes called the handle. Whenever there's a reversal, eventually it'll have a pullback, and that creates a cup and handle pattern. The market sold off strongly, and then reversed up strongly, and then it pulled back, and it tested the breakout at the top of this trading range. This is what traders sometimes call a cup and handle pattern. This is a cup, and the pullback is the handle. The reversal is the cup, and the pullback from the breakout is the handle. They'll buy above the bull bar, looking for what they hope is a trend up. Traders look either to buy the reversal up initially, the breakout, or the pullback from the breakout, the handle, the buy above the bull bar, looking for what they hope is a trend up. It's often also a higher low major trend reversal. We have a bear trendable breakout and a higher low. There are also upside down cup and handle patterns when you get a reversal down from a high. Here we have a strong trend and a strong reversal down, and we get a pullback there, or this is a cup and a handle pattern. You could simply call it a reversal, a lower high major trend reversal, head and shoulders top, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Doesn't matter what you call it. The market's reversing strongly down and it's pulling back. Traders will look to sell with a stop on the breakout below the pullback. They now see this as a bear trend and this pullback as a bear flag. A reversal is the earliest entry into a trend. And when you're entering on a reversal, your probability is less, but so is your risk. And therefore, the better risk reward ratio compensates for the lower probability. My 80% rule, 80% of the time, if the market is in a trend and it's trying to reverse, the reversal will fail. Likewise, if it's in a trading range, 80% of the time, if it tries to break out, the breakout will fail. And finally, I talked about a cup and handle pattern. A cup and handle pattern is a term you'll sometimes hear. And all it means is that you have a reversal, which is sometimes called the cup, and then a pullback from the reversal, which is sometimes called the handle. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on reversals.