 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading tight bull channels. As long as the channel is tight, the reversal that you see will probably be minor. And if the bull trend resumes again in a tight channel, the next reversal will usually be minor as well. We have a bull channel, pullback only one bar. We have an II, not even pulling back. A brief pullback, not very deep. It's a pretty tight bull channel. We went sideways and now we're resuming up. But bad follow through here and weak follow through here. The channel is resuming. Therefore, chances are the first reversal down will be minor. And that means that you'll either get a bull flag like we had here or here or a trading range. And if it's a trading range, the market should test back up to the high. Therefore, if a trader buys even the worst price, the high close up here, his risk is small if he manages his trade well, which means rely on the stop. And it's better if he's able to buy more lower and then get out break even at his first entry and with a profit on his lower entry. A tight bull channel rarely will reverse into a bear trend without first entering a trading range. And at this point, you don't know if this is an exhaustive buy climax and the end of the bull trend. It's the biggest bull bar and more than 20 bars. Possible final flag, wedge, one, two, and then three. So it could be the end of the trend. But even if you do get an exhaustive buy climax, the market usually tests the low of the buy climax and then enters the trading range before the bears are able to get a major reversal of the trend. Reversal from a bull trend into a bear trend. We have a tight bull channel here and a bigger tight bull channel here. The market broke below this bull trend line and it broke below that bull trend line. This is not enough bars for a major trend reversal. Not enough selling pressure, about seven or eight bars, but none very big. And the resumption of the bull trend was only three bars. That's usually not enough for a reversal from a bull trend into a bear trend. And therefore, it's probably a minor reversal leading to more of a trading range. Also, not a clear broad wedge, which is another type of top that can lead to a major reversal. Therefore, the odds that this is a major reversal are maybe 30% that this is going to be the shard of a bear trend. Without first going into a trading range. 70% chance that it's either going to be a bull flag and the trend will resume up or it will be a trading range. And you'll be able to get out break even at your first entry. Many bulls who buy this close expect either a trading range or a bull flag. And a trading range often tests the bottom of the final buy climax and usually has about 10 bars and two legs down. Leg one, pull back leg two. Testing the low of the final buy climax. And now we have a decent looking buy signal bar. A lot of bulls will add to their position here, relying on a stop down here, below the bottom of the most recent strong leg up. They'll add if their second entry is at least as big as a scalp below the first entry. Their goal is to get out around the first entry, break even at the first entry, and then with the scalp on the second. And therefore they want the second entry at least the size of a scalp below the first. For example, they will not add here because getting along here is not one point below the first entry. And the emitting the minimum scalp size is one point. And if you're looking to add on in a pullback like this, you want your second entry to be at least one point below the first. If the bars are big and the range is big, you might want it two or three or four points below the first. Get out break even when the market gets up here. You're expecting either a bull flag or a trading range. You have a bull flag through here. And at this point, it's a trading range. And if it's a trading range, there will be a bear leg and a bull leg. That means the market should test up near your original entry price and allow you to get out break even on your original entry price. And if you add it on, you would have a profit on your second entry. At this point, it's a reasonable lower high major trend reversal. We have a slightly lower high. We have the market selling off for about 10 bars. We have it resuming up for about seven or eight bars. We have another buy climax with bad follow through. And you can see when the market got back near the high close, traders took profits. And now we have a bear bar. Therefore, this might be a small double top lower high major trend reversal leading to a bigger second leg down. So leg one, pull back leg two or leg one, leg two, leg three, leg four. It's reasonable to get out of longs on the reversal down because it's a reasonable sell setup. And bears will take that sell as well, looking for a couple of legs down after a lower high major trend reversal. You can also call it a double top lower high. This high is slightly above that, but both are below this. Remember, every major trend reversal top is a type of double top. And sometimes it's a perfect double top. Here, it looks like it's a little bit lower. Sometimes it's a little bit higher. They're all variations of a double top. Once you get a strong bear breakout, we have three consecutive bear bars. The bar is getting bigger, closes on or near the lows, breakout below the low of the past 20 bars or so. This is a strong enough sell off so that the market will probably have a second leg down. And therefore, a reversal up will probably fail. Traders will sell the close. They'll sell above this bear bar. It's a bad buy signal. And then we have two or three legs up. One, pull back. Two, pull back. Three. It's a wedge lower high. Traders will sell below the low of that bull bar or on the close of this bear bar or below its low. It's the end of the day, so probably not going to fall all that far, but it's a reasonable sell. We have a tight trading range early in the day, and now we're getting a bull breakout. A decent bull bar, closing above the high of the first 10 bars or so. And then we have a follow through bar. Yes, it has a big tail, and that means the breakout is weaker than it could be, but it also confirms the breakout. Now we have two closes above the opening range. The market's always in long, probably going up for at least a measured move, and probably going up for a swing. Let's say you buy the close of that bar or simply buy the market. Whenever you have a potential buy the close market like this, a breakout and follow through, a lot of traders will just hit buy the market right before the bar closes or right after it closes. Because the market's likely to have at least a second leg up, some traders will buy at the low of this bar, betting the reversal down will fail. And others will buy the close of this bar, betting that the reversal down will fail. This is about a 50% pullback. It's testing the breakout point, these highs. It's a reasonable buy. And other traders, alternatively, will buy on the reversal up, especially above a bull bar. We have a bear breakout, terrible follow through. The bear breakout or the bear reversal is probably going to fail. And this is probably just a breakout test of the top of the trading range. And the market will probably go up for at least a small second leg, possibly a swing up. Stop below the bottom of the bull breakout. Because if this is the start of a swing up on the open, the bulls should not allow the market to fall below the bottom of the start of the bull trend right here. If it falls below that low, then their premise that this is the start of a swing up lasting two or three hours is wrong. And they should get out and just take the loss. Once you look at a chart and you think the market is always in the long, it's good to buy at least a small position. You know where the stop has to be here or here. You just buy at the market or for any reason, like I said, below the bar, above this bar, and just use the appropriate stop and trade small if you have to, but you have to get long. Once you have a breakout and then a pullback, the breakout phase has ended and the market's now in the channel phase. You're expecting at least one small leg up and you have that here. But it's a good enough breakout and follow through three consecutive bull bars. We're probably going to go higher. Maybe a wedge, one, two, three. Maybe a swing up lasting two to three hours. Once you get a breakout on the open and the market's clearly always in the long, usually the swing up is going to last at least a couple of hours. So you don't want to be too quick to take profits. Another buy the close market. If you did not buy here or if you get out and you did not get long again here, you could simply buy the close. Now we have another strong breakout to a new high. You could put your stop below this low. If you get stopped out and the market reverses up from around this low, you could buy again. I always pay attention to whether or not a pullback from a breakout falls below the breakout point. We have a breakout and we have a pullback from the breakout. Did this low fall below this high? We have a breakout above this high right here and the pullback fell below this high. We have another breakout and the pullback fell below this high. That's a stairs pattern. And that means if the pullbacks are deep enough, bears selling at the prior high, using wide stops and scaling in higher can make money. And often is a sign that the bull channel is weak and that it might soon transition into a trading range, which it did here. However, if the pullbacks are small like this and like that, very little overlap, very difficult for the bears to make money. A bear selling this high probably did not make money. I can't tell if this fell low enough for them to make a one point scalp. If a bear sold this high and sold more at one point higher, maybe he made money. But it clearly is very difficult for the bears to make money. And that means the market's probably going higher. The bears are not aggressive and the bulls are buying even small pullbacks. The result is that the market probably will have to go higher. The market broke above this high, so this is the breakout point. When it broke here above these highs, that was the breakout point for this breakout. This is the breakout point for that breakout. And you can see the low of the pullback fell below the high of the breakout point. And therefore, this channel is a stairs pattern. We're getting overlap instead of gaps. Here we have a gap. This pullback did not fall below that breakout. There's a gap between this low and that high. And that's a sign of a strong trend. You assume the odds are you'll get at least a small second leg up. First leg up, pullback, testing the breakout. Not falling below the breakout point. Odds are we'll get at least a small second leg up. When you're looking at the market anywhere through here, you know it's a trend. When you look at a chart and you know it's a trend, that means you believe that there's a 60% chance the market is going higher. It never feels like it's that certain, but the reality is if you look at the chart and you say, yeah, that's a bull trend. What you're saying is you believe there's at least a 60% chance of it going higher. And as a trader, 60% is as good as it gets. Therefore, you have to trade. The easiest way to trade is just buy at the market and use the appropriate stop. So if you buy anywhere through here, the appropriate stop is down here below the most recent major high or low. We're getting pullbacks, but the pullbacks are small and they're brief. Only one bar. It didn't even fall below the low of the prior bar. A few bars, but did not fall very many points. If you look at a higher timeframe chart, maybe a 30 or a 60 minute chart, instead of getting pullbacks, you'll have a series of strong bull bars closing at or near their highs. That means this is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. And higher timeframe chart is only a timeframe or two higher than the current chart. And if you have a breakout on the next higher timeframe or two tired timeframes up, 15 minute, 30 minute, 60 minute, then you should not be thinking about selling. Whenever the market is in a small pullback bull trend like this, you know it's a breakout on the next higher timeframe, 15, 30, 60 minutes. And if it's a breakout on a timeframe, not much different from this, you can only look to buy. When you're in a channel, there are usually gaps and trading ranges that allow you to project measured move targets above. It's not as strong a trend as the breakout phase, but it's still a high probability bet that the market is going higher. The probability of a lot higher prices is less, but there's also less time pressure because you're getting pullbacks. It gives you time to think. In a strong breakout where you get bull bar, bull bar, bull bar, bull bar, bull bar, bull bar, you don't have time to think. The market just keeps going up and you have to buy. Here when you get pullbacks, it gives you a little bit more time to enter on a pullback. You see where the stop has to be. The market's moving up less quickly and you have more time to analyze what to do. Whether you're entering a breakout or a pullback, the risk is going to be the same. Or the stop is generally just about as far. We're in a channel, so it doesn't matter where you enter. The stop is going to be about as far as it would be in a breakout trade. For example, if you buy up here, the stop down here, you're risking about as much as a trader who bought the breakout, buying up here, stop down here. The reward is usually a little bit less in a channel than in a breakout, because the channel is a weaker trend and there's less profit remaining. You've already left the breakout phase and now you're on the channel phase and the next phase is a trading range. Once it's in the channel phase, it's less likely to extend as far up as it would when you're looking at the breakout phase. So there's a little bit less reward remaining in the trade as well. The problem that everyone faces when they're trading in a channel is that from the market cycle, you know a trend begins with a breakout. You get a pullback and then it enters a channel phase and then eventually it evolves into a trading range. The bears tried to bend it over into a trading range here. They failed. We got trend resumption up. They tried again here and they succeeded. And then eventually we got a trend down. To evolve from a trend into a trading range, you need a break below the trend line. So we have a bull trend line here. It broke below the bull trend line. It's a bull flag here. Once it gets 10 or 20 bars sideways, then you start to call it a trading range. We resumed up and then here we broke below the trend line. Not a very strong breakout, but sideways for about 10 bars, probably starting a trading range. Once you have a bull channel, you have a 75% chance of a bear break below the channel. That means a break below the trend line, the bull trend line. And it can come by either a reversal or simply by the market going sideways. Here we have a bull channel, a wedge bull channel. We broke below the bottom of the channel by going sideways. The bull trend resumed and now we have a broader bull channel. And again, we broke below the bottom of the channel, the bull trend line, by simply going sideways. Only a 25% chance you'll have a bull channel and then a strong breakout above the top of the channel, leading to an even stronger bull trend. Break out your new high, but a pullback within a bar. Break out your new high, pull back within a few bars. Break out to a new high, a pullback again within a few bars. Break out to a new high, and then a pullback within a couple bars. We're getting frequent pullbacks and that is a sign that the trend is weaker than when it was in the breakout phase. Traders are disappointed by how the market's behaving once it gets to the new high. We're breaking out, the breakout bar is not very big, has a tail on top, and then disappointing follow through a bear bar. We're breaking out again, not a very big breakout bar, followed by three dojis and then a couple bear bars. We're breaking out again with okay follow through, but overall the bars are fairly small. Channels usually evolve into trading ranges. You have a bull breakout, pullback. This whole thing is a channel. You expect a bear breakout either by going sideways or down, and then eventually a trading range. A trading range means it tends to test major higher lows like here and possibly all the way down to the bottom of the channel, which it did near the end of the day. The bulls are disappointed by the small breakout bars, the tails on tops of the bars, the bear bars after every breakout. The lack of very big bull bars, the breakout bars not being all that big. All of that increases the chances that this bull channel will end up being a bull leg in a trading range, which means the market will have some kind of reversal, a bear leg in the developing trading range. At this point, we're in a trading range. We went up, we went down. This is a bear leg in the range, and this is a bull leg in the range, even though it's also a bull leg in a bull trend. Eventually, when you look back, the trading range began somewhere, somewhere down here. We have consecutive bull bars, but they're not particularly big. Again, the sign of a channel and not a strong bull breakout. It disappoints the bulls, and it makes them quicker to take profits, and it makes them prefer to buy pullbacks instead of buying at prior highs. So instead of buying at this high, creating a strong breakout, they're taking profits, and we're getting pullbacks at every new high. We have a bigger breakout here, and it took 20 or 30 bars to get down below the breakout point, but eventually it did. And the bears who sold this high and scaled in higher eventually made money. They could not break even on their first sell right here at this high, and if they held and used a wide stop, they made money on their higher sell. It's a fairly tight channel, and therefore it's a reasonably strong trend. Traders will take the same buy setups as they do during the breakout phase. There's a big difference though. In the breakout phase, they're willing to buy at or above the high of the prior bar, betting that the breakout will succeed, and they're also willing to buy bull closes. This is a buy the close bull trend. When the market's in a channel, and they see these disappointing deep pullbacks, the bulls are buying the pullbacks, and when it gets to a new high, they're selling to take profits or at least partial profits. They are concerned that the rally is probably not all that strong, and it can turn into a trading range at any point, and therefore they're taking at least partial profits at prior highs. And then they buy again on a pullback. Instead of buying the breakout here, the way they bought the breakout here, or bought that close here, they're concerned that this deep pullback means maybe the next breakout will have a deep pullback as well, and therefore they'll take partial profits at a prior high and above. Whenever the market's in a tight bull channel and it tries to reverse, the reversal is usually minor. If the bull trend resumes, again staying in a tight bull channel, the next reversal will probably be minor as well. A minor reversal means either a bull flag, which leads to a resumption of the bull trend, or a trading range, and the reversal down probably will go back up and test the bull trend higher. Anyway, I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on trading and tight bull channels. from