 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos about trading at the end of the day. I'm going to begin by talking about bull and bear traps. A bull trap is trapping traders into buying when they should not be buying. A bear trap is encouraging traders into selling at a time when they should not be selling. Finally, I want to talk about higher timeframe support and resistance. By higher timeframe, I mean any higher timeframe. If you're trading on the five minute chart, any timeframe higher is important. 60 minute chart, daily chart, weekly chart, and monthly chart. 60 minute chart, a bull trap, and monthly chart. This is a nested high two buy setup. We have two legs down, one, pullback, two, and it's within a larger two legged move. One, pullback, two, and subdividing. If you looked at a 15-minute chart or a 60-minute chart, this would be a simple high 2 buy setup. Two legs down, one, pull back two. Is this going to be a buy the close finish? Well, the location is good. We have at the bottom of a trading range day a higher low. We have a nested high 2. But we only have one close above the moving average. And therefore, maybe 50% chance it's going to continue up. 50% chance it's not and might reverse down. This is not yet a buy the close rally. Traders probably need one more good bull bar. They need to see a follow-through bar. And instead of a follow-through bar, they got a reversal bar. That means the bulls were trapped into thinking that the high 2 was going to lead to a rally. And instead, it led to a reversal. Bears know the bulls are trapped. A lot of bears will sell below that bear bar. Or they'll wait until they get two or three bear closes and then sell closes. This is a bull trap. The bulls were tricked into buying high when, in fact, the market was simply trying to trap them and setting up a reversal. Always higher probability to wait until you see two or three bear bars. Just like the bulls, it would have been higher probability to wait until they see two or three bull bars and then buy. Since it's a reversal, traders will look for support around a measured move down. It's also a double top with this high. And the measured move down might be based upon this high instead of that high. And that measured move would be right around the low of the day. Bull trend and reversal. And you have a bear bar and you have a follow-through bar. But you also have some other things going on. You have a small pullback bull trend. You can argue it's a wedge. One, two, three. Or one, two, three. You can say it's a bull breakout above a bull channel. And therefore, 75% chance it's going to reverse down to the bottom of the channel. And the reversal will start within five bars of breaking out above the channel. All of that is correct. And you might also say, ah, the bulls made a lot of money. They'll take profits. Maybe we'll get a swing down to this higher low, that higher low. Maybe all the way down here. All of that is true. However, when you have a small pullback bull trend, the channel is tight and the target is not far. Also, when the market got near the moving average here, here, here, the bulls came back. Very tight bull channel. First reversal down, probably minor. That means either a bull flag and the bull trend resumes or a trading range. The chance of a bear trend coming out of a tight bull channel like this without at least a micro-double top, small. And therefore, this is probably going to be a bear trap. It's probably not the start of a bear trend. It's probably trapping traders into believing that this is the start of a bear trend. Can you sell that close? Sell below this bar? Sure. But chances are, if this is a minor reversal, testing support the bottom of this final bull flag. This is common when you have a strong bull trend, that you'll get a bigger correction sometime late in the day, 11 o'clock, 12 o'clock, sometime around there. It's profit-taking by the bulls. It's an attempt by the bears to reverse the trend. But a small pullback bull trend has a very small probability of becoming a bear trend. More likely, this is a bear trap, a moving average gap bar. There's a gap between the high of this bar and the moving average. Yes, the bears are strong enough to put a bar below the moving average for the first time. But usually, the first time the bears do anything, it fails. It's a minor reversal. And therefore, bulls see this as a potential bear trap, trapping bears into selling low. And the odds are the market will either go sideways or up. The bulls know that, and they'll buy the reversal up. We have a moving average gap bar in a bull trend, a failed breakout below the bottom of the channel. And now we have a bull bar. Other bulls will buy above the high of this bull bar or on the close of the second bar, expecting trend resumption up in the final bars of the day. Bears are giving up. We're getting a reversal. We sold off the bear seed follow-through bar. They wanted a sell-the-close finish, but we're getting a reversal. Bears get out either three or four ticks above a bear bar or one tick above a bull bar. And the bulls know that, and the bulls will buy as well, knowing that the bears will give up, and the bears will not look to sell again today. The market, at the end of the day, often tests support and resistance. So if you have a reversal day, here we have a bull trend for the first half, and we're starting to get a bear trend. It might be testing the open of the day or the low of the day or prior higher low like this. And therefore, if the market gets near those targets, you have to be prepared for a reversal. Sell-the-close, probably starting too early, probably not going to make it to the end of the day. If you get a double bottom at support, here, double bottom testing the open of the day, you have to be prepared to buy for a reversal up, especially if you get a good bull bar. Good-sized body closing on its high. A bull bar here, second entry. You have a micro double bottom at the bottom of a trading range day. A reversal day is a trading range day. We have a bull trend and then a bear trend. Big up, big down, big confusion, sideways. Unless the reversal goes far below the low, the reversal day is probably a trading range day, and it's unlikely to go far below the low of the day. And it very often will reverse. A reversal day is a trading range day, and therefore, if you get a second entry buy near the low of the day, it's a reasonable buy. The opposite is true if the market is below the open at the end of the day, and the day is a trading range day. The market will try to test back to the open at some point in the final hour or two. This is an example of the market being above the open on a day that is now a trading range day. The market tries to test down to the open late in the day. And when it gets there, it can go sideways, it can reverse, or it can break through. Micro double bottom, good bull bar. It looks like it's going to reverse. Higher time frame support and resistance is very important at the end of the day. At the end of every bar, traders pay attention to the close because it's usually a test of support and resistance. And that's true of every time frame. If the daily chart is closing, the close on the daily chart is important. And that means the final bars of the day on the five-minute chart affect the appearance of the daily chart. And that's true on the weekly and monthly charts as well. For example, on a Friday, the final hour or two or three of the five-minute chart is often going to test weekly support or resistance, like last week's low, last week's high, last week's close, or the high or low of any prior week. At the end of the month, the final hour, the final two, three, or four hours of the month will often test monthly support or resistance, like last month's close, last month's low, last month's high, or highs or lows of prior months. And therefore, if you're trading on the five-minute chart and today's the last hours of the week or the last hours of the month, pay attention to support and resistance on those higher time frames. If the market is reasonably close to any of those higher time frame targets, it'll often get drawn toward those targets. For example, here is a five-minute chart of the E-mini, and this is yesterday's close. The market opened above yesterday's close, sold off for most of the day, but now is trying to reverse up. The market might be trying to get above yesterday's close. There's a decent reversal here, and now we have a higher, low, major trend reversal. Be aware that yesterday's close is a magnet, especially in the final hour of today, final 30 minutes of today. And therefore, look for a reversal. Here we've got a buy-the-close rally. Traders will buy that close, this close, maybe that close. After the third or fourth close, traders usually stop buying because buy-the-close rallies in the final hour of the day usually only last four or five or six bars, and therefore buying the fifth or sixth bar is usually not profitable. Bulls will either start buying closes here. The market's stalling. They'll take profits here. Second entry. One, two. Reasonable to get out of longs here. But now we have a higher, low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout. A weak sell-off. 50% pullback. Test of this buy signal bar. A doji bar. And the magnet up here. Reasonable to buy above that bar. Or wait for this close or that close to buy. It became a buy-the-close finish here. Some traders will wait for a second bar to buy the close looking for a scalp up at the end of the day. Not enough time left to get a big swing. Usually, you're just getting a scalp when you're taking a buy-the-close finish in the final hour or the final half hour. A wedge. We reversed up, reversed up, reversed up. So there's a wedge. And it's a higher low. And it's a major trend reversal. It's testing the high of the buy signal bar. So it's a breakout test. And there's a magnet above. Yesterday's close. Bulls will buy the reversal up. If they want higher probability, they'll wait to buy closes. Buying closes, the stop is further away, but the probability of making money is higher. Buying it. In general, whenever you have a strong rally at the end of the day, you get out three or four ticks below any bull bar and one tick below any bear bar. weekly support and resistance is important on friday at the end of a friday monthly support and resistance is important in the final hour of the month this is a friday or at the end of the week final minutes of the week the final bars of the week and here's the weekly chart here's the five minute chart the market is rallying up it's testing last week's high and the high of two weeks ago it's trying to break above it did go above and this is above both of those resistance levels however you have to be prepared for a pullback down to resistance this is a buy vacuum up to resistance on the weekly chart it's racing up to get above last week's high and the high of two weeks ago is the breakout going to succeed or fail you have to be prepared for either one losing momentum possible final flag therefore you have to be prepared for a reversal back down to the targets below this is the high of two weeks ago right here and we're breaking strongly above it we tried to break above it again a second time but not a very strong breakout we're not very far above it you have to be prepared for a reversal back down below that resistance in other words the resistance might be holding just because you break above resistance does not mean the resistance goes away if you break far above it then the breakout is successful but if you go a little bit above it and you're stalling the resistance might be stopping the market and the market might pull back below that resistance this is the last day of the week and therefore at the end of the day the final hour weekly support and resistance can be important and therefore you should look at the weekly chart to see if there is important resistance and then watch what the market does around that resistance because you can get trades here's the high of last week that green line when it's starting to come down you have to think that the resistance might be holding and we may pull back below the resistance and look at today's close this is the close of the day on the five minute chart it's a friday so it's the close of the week as well and it's just below resistance on the weekly chart in fact it's below both of the resistance levels even though it broke out strongly above the follow-through was terrible and the breakout failed if you want you can call it a triangle you can call it a wedge you can call it a final flag but the breakout above is failing some traders will sell below the doji bar better to sell below a bear bar higher probability betting that the resistance is going to stop the rally and the market may end up closing below the resistance some traders will wait for a second or third close and then sell closes this is getting late in the day for selling closes not much profit potential left with just four bars remaining in the day if you take the higher probability sell the stop is further away but that's always the case whenever you take any trade where the probability is higher the risk is always going to be greater both are acceptable entries you would get out three or four ticks above any bar one tick above any bull bar since none of that happened traders will get out in the final minute or so of the day which is also the final minute of the week here's a monthly chart this is a five minute chart and this is the last day of the month and therefore in the final hour the market might be testing monthly support and resistance last month's high last month's close potential support resistance and this month's open is also a magnet and if the market is close to a magnet at the end of the month in the final hour it might get drawn to the magnet and therefore it's helpful to know where the magnets are because you can often get a trade bidding that the market will get to the magnet we're selling off at the end of the month we're above last month's high we're up here we're above last month's high but now we're starting to sell off you have to assume we're going to come down and test last month's high especially when the selling is reasonably strong like that we're selling fairly strongly down to below last month's high and therefore you have to wonder if the market might be testing some other target on the monthly chart like last month's close and we're still falling fairly strongly we're trying to bounce here we have a second entry bounce tight bear channel unlikely to go very far up however we are bouncing at last month's close here we're starting to reverse down again below two two legs up in a bear trend like one pull back like two and we have a bear bar closing on its low at the moving average it's reasonable to sell below or wait for a few bear bars and sell closes looking for a test of the next target on the monthly chart which is the open of this month and you can see the month closed two ticks above the open of the month and created a doji bar on the monthly chart an outside bar and a doji bar strong bear trend you can sell for any reason you could sell closes you could sell below bear flags you can sell above bull bars betting reversals up will fail you can sell strong bull closes at the moving average after a minor reversal betting that it will fail you can sell double top bear flags below a bear bar especially at the moving average you can sell closes of strong bear bars betting that any reversal up will be minor you can sell breakouts below bear flags below that bear bar below this bar below this bar use the appropriate stop scale in if you have to you can sell above any bar a bull bar or a bear bar because the bear channel is tight the first reversal up is minor meaning the best the bulls get is a trading range probably a bear flag traders need to be prepared for bull and bear traps at the end of the day a lot of times in the final hour or so the market will do something that will make traders think it's a good buy and in fact it's trapping bulls into buying and the market's about to reverse down likewise you'll get sell setups at the end of the day that can be traps for example if the market's in a strong bull trend and you're getting a sell setup it might be a trap and the market might resume back up at the end of the day traders always look for magnets for example at the end of the day traders look for magnets from today like today's open today's low today's high or magnets from yesterday yesterday's high low close if today's a if today's a friday traders look for support and resistance on the weekly chart like last week's high last week's close last week's low or the high of a couple weeks ago the low of a couple weeks ago and if today is the final day of the month and we're now in the final hour monthly support and resistance can be magnets if the market is close the market starts to go toward those higher timeframe magnets traders if they're quick and if they see what's going on will often be able to get a profitable trade I'm Al Brooks thank you for watching the Brooks trading course this is the third of three videos on trading at the end of the day you