 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of three videos on orders. There are only four orders that most traders should be using. Beginners should be entering only with stop orders. Experienced traders can also enter with limit orders. Beginners can exit with limit orders. Bracket orders, after you enter a trade, you should be using a bracket order, a stop order to protect you, and a limit order to take profits. And finally, I'll talk about market orders. Sometimes the market is just moving too fast and you need to get in or get out. The best way to do it is trading at the market. There are other order types as well, but most traders should not bother with them. Most traders should only use these four types of orders. Stop orders, limit orders, bracket orders, which are a combination of a stop plus a limit order, and market orders. When you open an account with your broker, he'll give you software that will allow you to trade, and these will be choices that are available in that software. They allow you to enter and exit trades. Most traders should almost always be entering with stop orders, because then at least the market is going in your direction. For example, to enter or exit a trade with a sell stop order, you place the order below the low of the current bar. For example, if you're long and you want to exit below the spare bar, you place a stop order just below its low. When this bar traded below that low, the stop order becomes a market order and you're filled at the market. You're not necessarily filled at your price. Sometimes the market will fall several ticks or pips below your price and then fill you, but at least you know as soon as the market falls to your price and touches your price, the stop order becomes a market order and you get filled at the next available opportunity. For example, if there are too many stop orders at the same price for the number of buy orders at that price, the orders that get entered first get filled first. If there are not enough buy orders to offset the sell orders at that price, the market has to go lower to fill the remaining sell orders. As a result, you may think you should get filled right below the low of this bar, but you could get filled quite a bit below the low of that bar. Again, if the market reaches your order, does not have to go through your order, it just has to touch your order, your order becomes a market order and you will get filled. Rarely, if you're trying to enter or exit with a sell stock, the market will hit your stock and then bounce and you'll get filled at a better price than your stock order. If you're trying to enter or exit a trade with a buy stop order, you place the order above the high of the current bar. So for example, as this bar is forming, you decide that you want to buy above its high if the market goes above its high. Either to exit a short, maybe you sold below here, or to go long thinking this is a pullback from this breakout. When the bar closes, you place a stop order to buy right above its high. As soon as the market goes above the high of this bar, it becomes a market order and you get filled on the next bar. If there are too many buy orders for the number of sell orders at the high of this bar, you may get filled at a worse price. And sometimes you could get filled at a much worse price. But if you trade a market that has a lot of volume, chances are you're going to get filled at your stock price or not much worse. If you're trading a stock that is priced at $1,000, you may get filled with 10, 20 or 50 cents slippage on every trade. And that is appropriate given the price of the stock. And even if you get a slippage of $1, in other words, if your fill is $1 worse than your entry price, that's no different from getting a one penny slippage on a $10 stock. As soon as you enter any trade, always place a protective stop. If you buy here, place a protective stop somewhere below, for example, here or here. If you sell here, let's say you sell to go short, place a protective stop somewhere, maybe above the high of this bar. But always have a protective stop in the market whenever you're in the market. A protective stop is a stop that protects you. It gets you out of a trade that is going against you. In fact, a protective stop is the single most important order that you'll ever use. Whenever you're in a trade, you should always have a protective stop in the market to protect you in case the market goes against you. It protects you mostly against yourself, especially if you're starting out. Because if you did not have the stop there, you would be in denial. And often you'll exit after the market goes far against you. For example, let's say you sold to go short here and you thought you might want to get out if it goes above the high of your entry bar or your signal bar here or here. And when it started to do that, you decided, well, maybe I'll give it more room. And you ended up exiting right here. If you had a protective stop, for example, above the high of this bar, you would have limited your losses. Without the protective stop, as a beginner, you'll usually exit at the worst price and you'll probably buy back your short here with a huge loss. Beginners hate to admit that they're wrong. And there's an important reason behind that. They don't want to take a loss. They're afraid that if they keep taking losses, their account will disappear. And if they no longer have enough money in their account to place trades, then their dream of becoming a successful trader dies. Taking losses is the equivalent of death if you're starting out. However, you need the protection because if you're simply relying on hope, hoping that a bad trade reverses and goes your way, you'll quickly lose all of your money. If a bear sells below the low of this bar, he might place his stop, his protective stop, just above the high of the most recent lower high. Let's say this is the most recent lower high. He would place a stop just above that bar. And if the market touches his stop order, it becomes a market order and he gets out. If this is a market that has a lot of volume, he'll get filled at his stop price or maybe just a little bit worse. If it's a market that has very little volume and the market hits the stop order, he may not get filled until here. Much worse. That's called slippage. When the market goes beyond your order price and you get filled at a much worse price. A bull who buys this high or low might place a stop below the bottom of this bull bar or below the bottom of the pullback, which is just a little bit below. If the market touches that stop order, which is this gold line, his order becomes a market order and it gets filled immediately. Exchanges operate on a first in, first out basis. The orders that get placed first get filled first. If there are not enough orders on the opposite side, the market has to go lower. And that means traders who are trying to get out with a stop right here might get filled at a worse price. If the market is a heavily traded market, usually the worst price will not be much different from the intended price where you placed your order. Slippage can be very big if you're trading a thinly traded market. Another very important reason why you should place stop orders whenever you're in the market is because of black swan events. These are unanticipated market events and they're real and they come every now and then. And current systems, your broker, the exchanges are not designed to prevent them because they're unanticipated. The theory behind black swans is that if you've only seen white swans, it's natural to believe that black swans do not exist. But they do exist. And just because you've never seen one does not mean that they do not exist. It might mean that they're uncommon and therefore low probability, but they're real. If you're trading, you have to protect yourself against these low probability extreme events. And that's one of the purposes of protective stops. Nobody knows the unknowable. The software developers, the hardware developers, the developers who create the equipment used by the exchanges, by your broker, by you. Nobody knows what is unknowable and therefore nobody can design software and hardware to cover every possible thing that can happen, including black swans. All brokers get overwhelmed. All exchanges get overwhelmed and fail every 10 years or so. If you talk to your broker, they'll totally deny it. They'll say, oh, no, we got really smart people. We have the world's best equipment. It can never happen. But I've seen it happen many times in my 30 years of trading. For example, in 1987, when I began trading, the market crashed. It lost 25% in one day. And nobody knew what the value of the market was until the end of the day. There were no prices all day long. In 2010, there was the flash crash and the market lost 9% in 36 minutes. And this is at a time when everyone thought the world's best computers and the world's best software would prevent anything like that. And then if you go back to 1929, Black Friday, that was the start of a correction that lost 90% of the stock market value in three years. A protective stop is supposed to protect you, but it doesn't always give you the protection that you hoped. For example, this is Hewlett Packard. Big gaps in stocks are common, especially after earnings reports. And a protective stop can get filled at a much worse price than you ever expected. Unexpected news events can also lead to huge gaps in the market. And the result is you think your stop is going to protect you, but your fill could be so bad that it's offering no protection at all. Here's Hewlett Packard. Here's that same chart, but the bars are a little bit more compressed. And let's say you bought above this full bar. We tried to reverse up repeatedly at the bottom of a trading range. It's a reasonable buy. And so you're long at 22.56. And to be safe, you place your stop order, your protective stop order, right below the bottom of this triangle. One tick below that low maybe. So your stop is at $21.99. Your risk is therefore $0.57. You bought at $22.56 and you plan to get stopped out at $21.99. But remember, the first trade that touches your price or goes below your price makes your stop order a market order. And if you're long and this is the day before earnings, you have to be prepared for a surprise. And this is what happened. The next day the market opened down here at $18.00. This is the first trade at or below your stop order. So your stop order becomes a market order down here and you get filled around $18.00. Instead of risking $0.57, you end up losing $4.56, not just $0.57. Your stop offered no protection. However, you still need some kind of protection whenever you're taking a trade. If you're in a position going into an earnings event, buying puts provides much better protection than using a stop. The downside of buying puts is you're buying, you're paying money. Puts cost money. Most of the time they'll end up expiring worthless. However, they avoid catastrophes like this. Most institutions, most professional traders protect themselves by buying puts to offset huge losses that can come from black swan events like a much worse earnings report than anyone expected. This is a 60 minute chart of the dollar versus the Swiss franc. The market broke to the upside, it broke to the downside and then reversed up twice. Pretty good sized bull bars. It's reasonable to go long above the height of this micro double bottom. Down up, down up, you buy on a stop maybe above that bar and you get long right here. Whenever you're in a trade, you need to place a protective stop to protect you against the market going too far against you. If you buy here, you're filled at 1.0190. You might put a stop below this low, which is at 0136. Your risk is 54 pips from here to your stop. The first trade that takes place at or below your stop turns your stop into a market order. This risk to your stop is your minimum risk. It's not your absolute risk. You might be risking much more than that. Unanticipated news events can happen in any market, including currencies. And the result is your protective stop may not protect you much at all. It's rare, but it can happen. This is that same chart right up here. You bought here and you put your stop here and you thought you were risking 54 pips. However, the market opened with a huge gap down. You can see where it opened. It opened down here. And therefore, the first trade that takes place at or below your stop was right here. And that means you get filled right here. You were filled probably around 88.94. You thought that the most you could lose was 54 pips. But in reality, you lost 1,242 pips. Much worse than you thought. Therefore, your stop offered no protection at all. But that is a risk of trading Forex markets. This is very rare. This is the kind of thing you see once every 10 or 20 years. But it does happen. And because of that, you have to be aware of it. You have to trade small enough so that if a catastrophe like this happens, the loss is not unbearable. Forex markets often have small gaps, like on Sunday when they open. Huge gaps like this are very rare. But when you get them, your protective stop gave you no protection at all. You lost far more, 30 times more, 20 or 30 times more than what you thought was your maximum risk. Should you still have a stop on the market? Yes, you should always have a stop in the market. I want to talk a little bit about limit orders. Beginners use limit orders to take profits. Experts can enter with limit orders as well. Unlike a stop order that becomes a market order as soon as your stop price is touched, the market usually has to go past a limit order for you to get filled. Maybe 90% of the time it has to go through the limit order before your order gets filled. 10% of the time if it touches your limit order, you will get filled. Let's say you buy with a stop above this pullback. We have a bull breakout and a pullback. You buy with a stop above the high of this bar and you get filled right there. And a scalper might want to exit with a minimum scalp. So he places a limit order at that minimum scalp price, this blue line. And as soon as the market goes above that blue line, he will be filled at his limit order price. Rarely he'll get filled at a better price. On the other hand, the scalper might decide that he wants a little bit more than a minimum scalp. And he might place his limit order to sell at the high of the bull trend. So he'll place a limit order to take profits here, to sell out of his long position here. And he would get filled here as soon as the market went above that price. If it touches that price, 90% of the time he will not get filled. It has to go above that price to make sure that you're filled. If it goes above the price, you will get filled. An experienced bear scalper might look at this and say, Oh, we went down, we went up, we went down, we went up. This is probably a trading range. And therefore, if we break above the high of this bar, we're probably not going to go up very far. A bear scalper may place a limit order to go short at this high. For him to get filled, 90% of the time, it has to go at least a little bit above that high to get filled. Again, entering with limit orders is something that experienced traders can do. Beginners should only be entering with stops. Because the market's racing up. And if you're selling, you have to be very comfortable being short in a market that's quickly going against you. And beginners invariably panic and they end up exiting with a loss up here instead of with a profit down here. A bear scalper will look at this chart and see a probable trading range. He'll place a limit order at that high to go short. And as soon as the market goes above his order, he'll get filled. Betting that the bull breakout will fail and reverse down. A limit order is basically the opposite of a stop order. A bull is getting stopped out above this bar. A limit order trader is placing his limit order to go short at the high of this bar. It usually has to go above the bar to get filled. The limit order bear is selling with a limit order. The stop order bull is buying. For example, if the bull wanted to buy a breakout hoping for a measured move up, he'll buy with a stop just above the high of this bar. Or a bear who is short down here, he might have his stop above the high of this bar to get stopped out. So he'll buy back his short if the market gets just a little bit above this bar. The bear who sold at this high might be looking for a scalp. He'll place a limit order, the blue line, to get out at a scalp distance from his entry. He sold with a limit order and he's looking to exit with a limit order. If the market falls below his limit order price, he'll get filled. If it simply falls exactly to his price but not below, 90% of the time he will not get filled. It usually has to go below his price to make sure his order is filled. If it does go below his price, he's guaranteed a fill. The scalper, instead of going for a minimum scalp, might hold and hope that the market falls below this low. He might place his limit order to take profit at this low. It has to go below the price to get filled 90% of the time. A bull might say, okay, we went down, up and down and up and down. It's probably a trading range and therefore the breakout below this low will fail. A bull experienced trader might place a limit order to buy at that low. He will go long at that low. And if the market fell a little bit below his entry price, he would get filled. And it did on this bar, although it's hard to see. The low of this bar is slightly below that gold line at the low over here. I now want to talk a little bit about bracket orders. A bracket order is a combination of a stop order and one or more limit orders. Whenever you're in any trade, you should always have a bracket order operating. It's a combination of two things, a protective stop order and a profit taking limit order. A bracket order, it brackets the current market, the current price. It's also called an OCO order. Some brokers say OCO stands for order cancels order. Other brokers say one cancels other. And what it means is if you have a bracket order, a stop and a limit order, as soon as one of the two orders is filled, the other one gets cancelled automatically immediately. Most brokers will allow you to attach a bracket order to your entry order, which means you place an entry order. The bracket order then is created but not filled. As soon as your entry order is filled, your software and your broker automatically then place the bracket order. They automatically place both a stop order to protect you and a limit order where you can take profits. The order is created as soon as you place your order to enter the trade. The order does not get placed until your order to enter the trade is filled and you enter the trade. You get to decide how far away the orders are. How far should your stock be? How much are you willing to risk? How far should your profit-taking limit order should be? Some traders split the profit-taking limit order into two or three smaller orders. They want to scale out, take some profit quickly, and take other profit as the trade goes their way. For example, let's say you are long three units. Your stop, therefore, is for three units below the market. And your limit order, you might have three limit orders, each for one unit above. If the first one gets filled, you then have two contracts left. Your broker software will automatically change your stop to two contracts because now you're only long two contracts. When the second limit order gets filled, you're now long only one contract. Your software will automatically change the stop to one contract. Again, as soon as your entry order is filled, if you set up your software correctly so that you attach a bracket order to every entry order, your software then places the bracket order. If a bear sells on a stop below this bar, he should have an attached bracket order. And as soon as his order is filled, he gets filled as this bar goes below that low, he now has both a protective stop and a profit-taking limit order. For example, he might place a protective stop above the high of this bar. You can see this gold line is his stop just above the high of that bar. And he might want to take a profit down here, maybe two times his risk. You can see the distance to his stop is further than the distance to his profit-taking limit order. He can decide where to put the stop and where to put the profit-taking limit order, and they do not have to be at the same price. As soon as he gets stopped into the market, his attached bracket order becomes active. And he now has an active protective stop. If the market goes to this price, he'll get stopped out and this order will disappear. If instead it goes down to his profit-taking limit order, it has to go through the order to fill it. Then he gets out of his position and this stop will automatically get cancelled. In this particular case, let's say he was trying to get out here. Instead of going down, the market went up. He got stopped out with a loss. He sold here. He got stopped out here. This order then disappears. It will be filled. And this order disappears. As soon as the market reaches his stop, his stop automatically gets filled at the market. And he would exit with a loss. However, the stop protected him from a much bigger loss. When one order gets filled, the other one gets cancelled. It does not matter which one gets filled. If his stop gets filled, his profit-taking limit order gets cancelled. If instead the market goes here first, then the stop gets filled. Here's an example of a bull. Let's say he buys on a stop above the high of this bar. And he set up his software so that whenever he enters a trade, the market automatically creates a bracket order. With a stop below, a certain price below, he determines the price. And a profit-taking limit order above. Let's say his profit-taking limit order was up here. So as soon as he gets filled, he's long, and he had a limit order here, he can then quickly change the order to here if he thinks the market might not get much above this high. As long as the distance from here to there is at least the size of a minimum scalp, then that's an okay thing to do. On this bar, the market hit his limit order. However, it probably did not get filled. So his limit order to take profits is still alive, and his stop is still alive as well because he's still in his long position. As soon as the market went above his limit order, then he gets filled, and this order, the stop order, automatically gets canceled. He no longer has a position when he gets filled here. He exited his trade, so he no longer needs a stop order. If this order was not canceled, it would still be active. He'd be out of his position here. When the market came down and hit his stop, he would then find himself short. Bracket orders, as soon as one gets filled, the other order gets canceled automatically. There are many other types of orders. The only one that most traders ever need is a market order. Again, most traders should only be entering with stop orders, and they can exit either with a stop or limit order, their bracket order. A stop order can protect them against a big loss. A limit order can be used to exit with their profit. Sometimes the market is moving very fast, and you have to make a very quick decision, either to exit the trade that you're already in, or to enter a trade. And sometimes it's just better just to get in or get out immediately, and not wait for your stop to be hit, or not wait for a pullback that would allow you to enter at a better price with a limit order. And that is why all brokers have an option to create market orders. If you select market, for example, buy market, you'll get filled immediately at the market. If you pick sell market, you'll get filled immediately at the market. If you're long and you hit sell market, you'll immediately exit. If you're short and you hit buy market, you'll immediately exit. Buy orders, buy market orders, they're filled at the offer. In other words, slightly above. And sell market orders, they're filled at the bid slightly below. The bid asks spread. Brokers always make you buy at the worst price and sell at the worst price. Let's say over here, you're thinking maybe I should buy, maybe I should not buy. Maybe I'd like to see the market start to move up quickly before I buy. And as it's starting to go up, you decide, ah, I got to get long. You can just buy at the market. Just hit the button on your software, buy the market. Your software should automatically create a bracket order. For example, you might want to sell on a stop below this low. And let's say you're planning on taking a scalp profit. The market reaches your scalp, but you think it might go higher. And then you're disappointed by this big sell off. And you change your profit taking order to be right at this high. And you would get filled there. As soon as your limit order is filled, your stop gets canceled. You might decide that it's not likely to go down very far. And maybe you buy at the low of this bull bar. Betting that we'll get another higher low like this. For example, you buy here. Your bracket order would be a stop down here. To get you up if the market fell below this low. Or maybe below that low. And maybe you're hoping for a test of this high. So you have a limit order at that high. However, after you enter at the low of this bar, you get a second low. And maybe you're hoping for a test of this high. However, after you enter at the low of this bar, you get a second bear bar closing on its low. You then decide that your premise is wrong. That we're probably not going up. This might be a wedge top. 1, 2, 3, and a reversal down. And we have a follow through. At the close of this bar. A bar closing on its low. You decide, I just want to get up. I don't want it to hit my stop. I'll lose more. As soon as this bar closes, you hit sell market. And you get filled. I need to go ahead and fill it out. I need to get to the top. You get a hop on that low. And then, you know, this is a lower bar. I don't want it to hit my stop. You'll lose more. As soon as this bar closes, you hit sell market. At the close of this bar, a bar closing on its low, you decide, I just want to get up. I don't want it to hit my stop. I'll lose more. As soon as this bar closes, you hit sell market, and you get filled as soon as the next bar opens, and you reduced your loss instead of waiting for your stop to be hit. We have a strong reversal down, and we have a second bar closing on its low. A lot of traders will see this as a sell-the-close market, a strong bear trend where you can make money by selling closes. If you think it's a sell-the-close market, as soon as this bar closes, you hit the button on your software, sell, sell the market, and you get filled immediately after you hit the order, and you get filled early on during this bar with a market order. Your software should immediately create a bracket order with a stop and a profit-taking limit order, and you might want to move the stop order so that it's just above this high, and you might want to change your limit order maybe to a measured move down, maybe based upon the height of this close to that high, maybe a little bit more, and you might drag it down here. In this particular case, you might be thinking the reversal down is strong enough for a swing trade, and I'll place my limit order down here. Your software will automatically cancel the order that is not filled as soon as one order is filled. If the market comes up here and hits your stop, this gets filled. If it comes down here to hit your profit target, your profit-taking limit order, you get filled, you're no longer short, your stop automatically gets canceled. There are many other types of orders, and many brokers offer lots of other choices for you. When I started trading 30 years ago, stop limit orders and marketable limit orders were pretty popular, and they were used, I think, mostly to protect traders against floor traders and unethical brokers and firms who were basically stealing money from traders. But now orders are computerized, and you don't have to worry about the floor traders stealing from you, and therefore stop limit orders and marketable limit orders are no longer useful. Your broker may brag that he has a variety of special types of orders. They're a waste of your time. They rarely ever offer any benefit, and when they do, the benefit is very small. You stand to make much more money just focusing on managing your trades well than using these other types of orders. You should stick to the four types that I talked about in this video. If you're a Forex trader, you have to be aware of some peculiarities of the Forex market. First of all, the charts are not based upon actual trades. They're usually based upon the bid or the ask or the midpoint or something else, and there may never have been a trade that takes place at a particular price on the chart. So, for example, if this were a Forex chart, it looks like the market traded to this high and turned down. It might not have. If this is a chart that's only showing ask prices, the market may not have ever reached that price. It's not showing trades. It's showing asks. Likewise, if it's only showing bids, it may never have reached this price. And the problem with that is stop and limit orders that you think should get filled by looking at the chart are not filled, and it's because the chart is not showing actual trades. It's only showing bid prices and ask prices. I discuss this in detail in the videos on Forex basics in the trading course. It's very important to understand that brokers are not held. And not held is a legal term. And what it means is that anything that goes wrong is your fault. You cannot hold them responsible. For example, if you think that your order should have been filled at a particular price, but it was not filled, call your broker. However, 99% of the time, if you think you should have been filled or you should have had a different fill, it's because you made a mistake and you simply did not realize it. The 1% of the time when it actually is the broker's fault or the exchange's fault, it's still your fault. It's very rare for them to change a trade and do what is right. I've had it happen maybe a couple of times in 30 years. Whenever you open an account, you sign a contract with your broker. And one of the clauses in that contract says not held. And it means that the broker is not responsible for any problems filling orders or not filling orders or for bad fills. And if you're unhappy with a fill or with the absence of a fill, it's always your fault. Even if it's not your fault, that's just part of trading. In this video, I talked about stop orders. Most traders should only be entering with stop orders and nothing else. Also, you need protective stops to protect yourself against disasters. However, they don't always protect yourself against disasters. There are some disasters that can cost you a lot of money even if you have a protective stop in the market. Experienced traders can enter with limit orders. All traders should be using limit orders to take profits. Bracket orders. You should set up your software so that as soon as you're in the market, the software immediately creates a bracket order. A protective stop in case the market goes against you and a profit taking limit order so that if the market goes your way, you can exit with the profit. Market orders are handy sometimes, but you usually will not use them. They're handy to get out of a bad trade that's going quickly against you instead of allowing the market to hit a stop and creating a bigger loss. They're also handy to enter a trade that's going very quickly in the direction that you thought it would enter and you do not want to wait for a pullback. All other order types I think you should avoid. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of three videos on orders.