 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on swing trading and scalping. In this video, I want to define what I mean by swing trading and what I mean by scalping. A swing trade in general is any trade where you're going for a reward that is at least twice as big as your risk. I think swing traders have a different personality from scalpers. Although scalpers sometimes swing part of their trade and swing traders sometimes scalp, in general, I think it's two different mindsets. I think the vast majority of profitable traders are swing traders. It takes a very special and unusual personality to be a successful scalper. Most traders should not be scalping. We have a good bull breakout. Four consecutive bull bars, three good sized bars closing on their highs. This is a reasonable buy for both a scalper and for a swing trader. If they buy, they could put a stop right below the low of this bar. It's a second entry buy. Leg one, pullback, leg two. The first leg has a reasonable buy here and here as well. But this is a second attempt at trend resumption up. And it's around a 50% pullback. The initial risk is to below the bottom of the signal bar. And the traders buy just above the high of the signal bar. So they get in here. Their initial risk is here. It's a fairly high probability trade. And therefore, traders have a positive traders equation if they exit with a reward simply equal to their risk. A scalper buying here, stop here, can then get out here, a reward equal to his risk, and have a positive traders equation. Some scalpers might hold hoping for more. And some of those scalpers will then get out on a reversal down below the low of this bar. And they'll get out right here. Their concern, maybe we've got a double top, lower high, and a swing down. A scalper wants high probability of a profit. And that means a quick profit. And they do not want pullbacks or they only want brief pullbacks. In return, they're willing to accept small reward. Any trader who wants a high probability trade is going to be taking a small profit. That is the trade off. There always has to be a reason for an institution to take the other side of the trade. If you get high probability, you get small reward and generally relatively big risk. In other words, a bad risk reward ratio. In general, a scalper needs a probability of 60 to 90% that the market is going to reach his reward before it hits his stock. Also in general, the reward is about the same size as the risk. In other words, a risk reward ratio of one, which is not very good. Most traders need to be going for a reward that is at least twice as big as their risk if they're going to be consistently profitable. The scalper gets out here. The swing trader holds on to his trade until the premise is no longer valid. For example, until there's a reasonable reason for bears to take a short. Possible final flag. The biggest bull bar. 20 or more bars into the trend. Probably a climactic end of the trend. A bear bar closing on its low. This is a reasonable location to exit longs, thinking that either the market is going to enter a bear trend or it's going to go sideways and evolve into a trading range. The premise of a bull trend is now much lower, so it's reasonable for a swing trader to get out here. If he does, his reward is many times bigger than his initial risk. A scalper will often trade a minor reversal if he thinks the reversal will be far enough down for him to make a profit. It has to be at least the minimum scalp size. And if he thinks the probability is high enough to offset the risk. Remember, a minor reversal means that the trend is likely to continue or at least evolve into a trading range and not become an opposite trend. A minor reversal is small and a scalper only needs a small profit. The scalper will often trade against a trend if he thinks the minor reversal will be at least big enough for a minimum scalp. For example, here we have a series of biclimaxes here, here, then two bars here, and then here. And this is a very big bar breaking above the top of the bull channel. A scalper will often sell below the low of that bear bar. It's a decent bear bar closing near its low. Looking for at least a test of the bottom of the most recent biclimax bar. He'll take that short as long as the distance between his entry price and that bottom of the biclimax bar is at least as big as a minimum scalp. And if he thinks the probability is high enough to offset the risk. Bulls and bears expect a couple legs down after a parabolic biclimax. It's also up to around a measure move up from this low to this high. We have a bull breakout here. However, they also expect the bull trend to resume after the pullback, either to here or to here. And therefore, the reversal is minor. The bear who takes that short typically would put his top above the bear bar. The top of the bull trend is only a little bit higher. He could put his top above the top of the bull trend as well. He's looking for the market to test the bottom of the final biclimax bar. The biggest bar in the trend, the breakout above the bull channel. He'll take his profit there. A swing trader will often hold onto his position despite minor reversals. Because a minor reversal by definition means that the trend has not changed. The trend is likely to resume. For example, here we have a bull bar, another bull bar. And then we have a pair of bull bars breaking above a trading range. And we have a bull follow-through bar. A lot of bulls will buy that close. Expecting that, even if we reverse down here, there will be at least a second leg up. If he buys here and it pulls back, he can buy more here. It will test back up here. He can get up break-even on his first entry and with a profit on his second entry. We have a pullback. It started after one more bar. A bull breakout of a bull channel and a decent reversal bar. It's probably going to pull back for a couple legs. One pullback, two. Tight channel. Tight channel. It could be the first of a more complex pullback. One pullback, two. In any case, any bull buying here believes this is a minor reversal and that either the reversal down will lead to a trading range, which it did for about 30 or 40 bars, or a resumption of the bull trend. And therefore, he's willing to buy, not exit on the minor reversal, and simply rely on his stock. Again, a minor reversal means that it will be a pullback, in other words, a bull flag, or at worst, a trading range. In either case, he can avoid a loss by scaling in. Even if he had bought this high close right here, he could rely on his stock and then buy more either above this bull bar or above this bull bar. And then when it gets back up to his original entry price, had he bought the high close, he could get out break even in his first entry and with a profit on his lower entry. Here, late in the session, we have another reversal. However, the bulls are losing momentum. We're getting a lot of doji bars. A horizontal trading range late in a bull trend often becomes the final bull flag. We have the biggest bull bar occurring more than 20 bars into a bull trend. Here, we have the biggest bull bar in about 50 bars. It's probably an exhaustive end to the trend. And it's also a nested wedge. Different ways to count the three pushes. One, two, three. One, two, three. Therefore, this has a pretty good chance of being a major reversal, leading either to a trading range or an opposite trend. It's a good location for the bulls to exit. Minor reversal. Many bulls will hold long if they buy here. Major reversal. The bulls will exit and bears will start to short. When there's a major reversal, traders expect either a bear trend or a trading range. A minor reversal and a bull trend, traders expect either a bear trend or a trading range. Traders expect either a bull flag and trend resumption or a pullback and a trading range. Some swing traders will exit when there's a minor reversal if they think the minor reversal might, in fact, become a major reversal. For example, let's say a bull bought the follow-through bar from this breakout. And then he sees an even bigger bar breaking above the top of a bull channel. And he sees that it's around a measured move up. From this low to the top of what was a bear flag. We broke strongly above. And we went up to a bottom measured move. And then the market's reversing down. This might become a large trading range. And it could test all the way down to the bottom here. Some swing traders who buy here will exit here knowing that it's probably going to either be a trading range or a bull flag. But they take that exit if they're willing to buy again when they think the bull trend is resuming up. For example, they might buy above this bull bar. High one, high two. Or after a bigger test down to around a 50% pullback above a bull bar. This is where the always in bulls buy again. This is not enough to make it always in short. And therefore it's always in long. It's around a 50% pullback. It's testing the breakout point above this bear flag. It's a reasonable place to get long. The bulls who bought again here will exit up here. Toward the end of the session after a possible major trend reversal. Again, a bull who bought for any reason during this bull trend can rely on his stop. Betting that the first reversal down will be minor and there will be at least a small second leg up. Or he could exit on a reversal that he thinks might be major. And then look to buy again on a resumption of the bull trend. I talked about several ways to distinguish whether a trade is a swing trade or a scalp. An important way is how a trader plans to manage the trade when he puts the trade on. If he's planning to manage it like a swing trade and he holds on through minor reversals, he holds on for 10 bars, 20 bars, 30 bars. Even if his profit is less than two times his initial risk or his actual risk, it's still a swing trade. If he's managing it like a swing trade, whether or not it's profitable at all, it's still a swing trade. For example, let's say a trader looks at this breakout and concludes it's very strong, and the first reversal down will probably be minor. He goes ahead and he buys the close of this bar. He knows its consecutive buy climaxes here, here, here, and here. However, he assumes that any reversal down will be minor and become either a bull flag or a trading range. And therefore he's willing to buy and put a stop below the bottom of the bull trend. There's something special about this particular setup. It's a very strong breakout. Whenever you have a very strong breakout like this, there's a 60% chance that the market will rally for a measured move up from the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar of the breakout. Traders will often put a stop below the bottom of the breakout rather than all the way down below the bottom of the bull trend. This is reasonable. Whenever you use a tighter stop like this, the probability of success is less, but it's still in this particular case, 60%. A very strong bull breakout, a series of bull bars. The market has a 60% chance of continuing up for a measured move based upon the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar, which would be somewhere up here. Even if there is a pretty big pullback in between. If the market goes straight up here in just one bar in the exits, is it a scalp or a swing? Well, the reward is probably many times greater than the size of a minimum scalp, and therefore I would call it a swing. He went for a profit that would have been many times bigger than the actual risk, and I would call that a swing. So for example, if he buys here and it just goes straight up here, his actual risk would have been very tiny, and his reward would have been very big relative to that risk. That would be a swing. Even though he would be exiting in only one bar, which is what a scalper does, he would be getting a swing trader's profit, and he had the intention to hold for many, many bars with the goal of reaching that measured move target. Look what took place up here. The trader held his trade for about 50 bars. He held through a fairly deep pullback, a 50% pullback, a minor reversal though. And now we have a potential final bull flag right below the target. It's fairly common when the market gets near an important target for the market to turn down before it gets to the target. Because this is a possible major trend reversal, a wedge, one, two, three, or one, two, three, a final flag, and the biggest bull bar, more than 20 bars into the trend. In fact, this bull bar is bigger than all the bull bars for maybe 50 or 60 bars. Therefore, very likely to be an exhaustion bar. It's reasonable to get out here. However, some swing traders will continue to hold with their stock below the most recent major higher low, with the intention of getting out near their goal. When you're this close to the goal, do you really want to continue to use the stock down here? I think most swing traders would not risk this much to make this little profit. However, it's reasonable to do. Instead, they would exit here, wait for a couple of legs down, and then buy again above the bull bar here, looking for a test of this high, or the market reaching the target. When the probability is high like this, 60% or more, traders do not need a reward equal to two times the risk to make a positive trader's equation. All they need is a reward equal to their risk. The trader who bought here, even though he's exiting with the reward one times his initial risk if he put his stop here, he intended to hold for many bars. He intended to hold through minor reversals. He did here, here, here, here, and he either got out here or he held all the way here. He was planning to manage the trade as a swing trade. He did manage it as a swing trade, and therefore it is a swing trade, even though the market did not reach a reward equal to two times his initial risk. His actual risk was below the low of this bar. If he bought here, the market turned down to here and went all the way up there. The most he needed to stay in the trade, in hindsight, was a stop right here. So he actually only risked from his entry price to just below the low of this bar. And this reward, I don't know if it's twice actual risk. Here's his entry price. Here's his actual risk. It's not quite twice his actual risk, but it doesn't matter. Traders would still call this a swing because he held for a lot of bars, and he held through several minor reversals. Again, actual risk is just below the low of the deepest pullback after he entered the trade. The bears tried to get a reversal, but it's a higher low, and it's a breakout test of this high. The bears have a bear reversal and a follow through bar, but bad follow through here. And now there's a micro double bottom with another bull bar. This is a reasonable buy for a swing trader, betting that the bear reversal will fail and that the bull trend will resume. However, this is a strong enough reversal down with bear follow through and a reasonable top, maybe a wedge, one, two, three, maybe a final flag. And then an exhaustive buy climax, trapped bulls who bought above that bull bar. The probability of this trade is much less than the probability here. This has a much higher risk of the bull trend no longer being in effect. The market might now be in a trading range. We might get leg one, pullback leg two. It might also be in a bear trend, bear spike, pullback and channel. The probability here is less than the probability there. You're also buying at the top of a tight trading range and breakouts tend to fail. So again, the probability is lower buying here. Yet, if you do buy here, you're hoping that the double bottom holds, that the market does not fall below the double bottom. It's reasonable to place a stop below the double bottom. Because it's a lower probability trade, a trader needs to compensate with good risk reward. So, a trader buying here, with a stop here, has to be planning to exit with a reward that is at least twice as big as his risk. He buys above the spare bar, or above that bull bar. Let's say he buys above the spare bar. He gets filled right here. His initial stop is here. This is one times his risk. And this is two times his risk. A reasonable location to take profits, especially since it's near the top of a possible developing trading range. Low probability trade, traders should go for a reward that is at least twice as big as their risk. They need a good risk reward ratio to offset the low probability. Without that, you are not structuring a profitable trade. In other words, the trader's equation is not positive, and therefore you are not likely to make a profit. I have general guidelines that I use when I define what a swing trade is. For example, in the e-mini, if I'm swing trading, I'm going for a reward that is at least four points. If I'm trading in the Forex markets, I'm going for a reward that is at least 40 pips. If I'm trading stocks and it's a $100 stock, my minimum goal for a swing trade is at least 50 cents. When a swing trader takes a trade, he's hoping for a trend. And remember, a trend is a swing that covers at least half the bars on the screen. The minimum goal is two legs and 10 bars, but most swing traders are expecting at least 20 bars, and that is about two hours on a five-minute chart. Also, the reward should be at least twice as big as the risk. It often is many times bigger. It's common for traders to take a trade and they're not sure if the profit will be a big scalp or a small swing. Most traders should only be taking trades if they feel like they can take it for a swing trade. These are all reasonable swing entries. We have a two-bar bull breakout closing on its high after a series of other bull bars. Reasonable to buy here. Buy the close. Reasonable to buy here. High one buy. High two buy. Reasonable to buy. More complex high two. High one. Pull back high two. All reasonable swing trades and it's reasonable to use the same stop, either below the bottom of this buy climax or the bottom of the bull trend. The minimum reward for any one of those entries is based upon the distance to the stop. For example, you could buy here. Stop down here. Depending on a buy the close bull trend. If you buy here. Stop here. One times risk is right here. It's reasonable to exit here because you're taking a high probability trade. If you're going for a swing instead, two times risk is up here. And you can see there was some profit taking here. This is where scalpers would get out. This is where swing traders would at least take partial profits. A scalp means that you're going for a reward that is less than twice your risk. Most scalpers take profits within one to five bars and they prefer that the market not pull back, not reverse. For example, a trader might sell below the low of this bear bar and then scalp out. A trader might buy above this bull inside bar, betting on a little bit more up. A trader might buy this close. A trader might buy here. A trader might buy below that doji bar, betting after five bars up, there will be buyers below. Here we have a bull II and a bull trend. So a trader might buy above that small bull bar. And they might buy this close after a bull breakout bar. You could buy below this bear bar. Even though it's three pushes up, one, two, three, it's about a 15 bar or 10 bar bull micro channel. The odds are the first reversal down will fail and will become a bull flag. Or you can buy above this inside bar. It's a small high two, high one, high two. Or you could also call it a wedge bull flag for trend resumption up. And we have a strong bear breakout and strong bear follow through. Probably you'll get at least a small second leg down. A scalper will sell the high of this bear bar and get filled right here. This looks pretty easy to do, but it's really not. And beginners should not be scalping. And most experienced traders prefer not to scalp because it's hard to do and it doesn't suit their personality. Any scalp is a reasonable swing trade. And all of these are reasonable scalps. And they're also reasonable swing trades. Even selling here is a reasonable swing trade, although it turned into a loser. If you are scalping, it's easier to make money if you can use a swing stop and scale in. For example, if you're scalping and let's say you bought here, it's better if you're able to use a stop down here or down here and then buy more lower. For example, the size of a scalp lower or the size of two scalps lower or on reversal up. As long as this entry is at least as big as a scalp below your first entry. The traders who do buy here and buy more here will often try to get out break even around their first entry and then with a scalp on their second entry. Therefore, they want that second entry to be at least the size of a scalp below their first. If you are a scalper and you're using a wide stop and you're scaling in lower, it increases your probability of success, but it also increases your risk. You therefore have to be trading a very small position, at least initially. And you have to have the temperament that allows you to have a trade go against you. For example, if you buy here, are you able to hold long when the market is doing this, relying on your stock here or here? If you're not, if it causes too much stress, you cannot be doing that long term. That's not a career type of trade for you and therefore you should not be taking that trade, at least not for a scalp. A swing trader would be much more comfortable buying here and putting a stop here or here, trusting that the odds are the market's going to have a second leg up. A scalper, on the other hand, is going for a very small profit and he's very concerned about a risk that becomes greater than his reward. If you're unable to trade that comfortably, if you have too much stress, you cannot be doing that type of trade. And that is one of the main reasons why most traders should not be scalping as their primary source of income. It's just too hard to do emotionally. It's not fun for most traders. Most traders do not like to do it. It's too stressful. When the market's clearly always in long, and it is all the way up here, a swing trader can buy at any time and for any reason. However, he has to use the correct stop. And the correct stop is always below the bottom of the most recent strong leg up. In other words, the most recent higher low. Here we have a higher low. Not yet a major higher low, but after you start to get a strong rally, especially a rally to a new high, this becomes a major higher low. No matter where you bought and for whatever reason you bought, once the market is up here, traders will put their stop here. If it was here or here initially, they'll trail it. They'll move it up to here. And the same here. No matter what reason you use to buy all through here, once you have a strong breakout, traders will see this as a major higher low and they'll move their stop here. If you're buying anywhere in here, once the market is here, traders are going to tighten their stop to either here, the bottom of the most recent breakout or the bottom of the most recent leg up. Swing traders are going for a reward that is at least twice as big as their risk and they allow pullbacks. For example, if you buy here, the market pulls back further. You're still holding on to your position. Even though this is a pretty good bull bar and the market fell below it, swing traders will still hold long because their stop is probably down here. They allow pullbacks and they expect to hold on to the trade for at least 10 bars. Most swings last at least 20 bars and therefore swing traders are willing to hold for a long time through a lot of pullbacks. If you're holding on to a trade that's going to last 20 or 30 bars, you're going to have pullbacks and some of them are going to be pretty big. For example, like this. After every strong breakout to a new high, traders tighten their stops. The market goes up here. You raise the stop to here. Whether it was here or here, you raise it to here. Now we have a strong breakout here. The stop is now here or here. That's called trailing your stop. Scalpers can only take a trade if they believe the probability is 60% or greater. And they want that probability to be 60% without scaling in. They're willing to scale in, but when they take the trade initially, they believe they're taking a high probability trade. A trade that has a probability of at least 60%. These are reasonable trades. Buying here, 60% chance the market is going to go up for a reward equal to the risk. Buying here, 60% chance it's going to go up at least as big as the risk. And when the probability is high, you can swing or scalp. The probability is high for a scalp, not high for a swing. Buying here, it's a high probability trade for a scalp, not necessarily a high probability for a swing. And that's the same here. You know it's a high probability that it's going up for a scalp. You hope that it's going to go all the way up here. It's only a 40% probability that you're going to get a swing. Any entry is only a 40% probability of a swing trade. But many entries are a 60% probability of a scalp trade. Here's an example on the 5-Minute E-Mini chart. If your stop is 8 ticks away from your entry price, then your risk is 8 ticks. If the reward is 16 ticks or more, twice the size of the risk, I call that a swing trade. If the profit is less than 16 ticks, I call it a scalp. Here we have a double bottom in a bear trend. Pretty good buying here, buying here, and here. And you have a good buy signal bar. So let's say a trader buys here, betting on either a scalp, betting on a trading range, or a bear flag, or possibly even a bull trend, a reversal. If he buys here, his stop is going to be below the buy signal bar. And in this particular case, it's 10 ticks below his entry price. He entered one tick above the high of that bull bar, and his stop is one tick below. If he exits here, he has 10 ticks profit, and that's one times his risk. That is a scalp. It's a high probability trade. I think this is certainly good enough for a scalp. But it's also a reasonable swing trade. If he exits here, two times his risk, I would call it a swing trade. And obviously, if he exited below here or below here, that would also be a swing trade. The minimum goal for a swing trader is at least twice his risk. When he buys here, he has a 60% chance of the market going here, and maybe a 40% or 50% chance of it going here, and probably less than a 40% chance of it going all the way up here. If it does, this is three or four times his risk. That is a great risk-reward ratio. So, for example, if he exits here, a wedge, one, two, three, testing near the high, you have a bear bar, you have a second leg up, strong enough breakout here for at least a small second leg up, and now it's reversing down. If he exits below this bear bar, he gets filled here. This is 38 ticks profit, which is far more than twice his risk, and therefore, buying here and exiting here is a swing trade, just like exiting here is a swing trade as well. This is a five-minute chart of the British pound versus the dollar. Most Forex traders don't refer to trades as swings or scalps. They call everything a trade. I use the term swings and scalps. Traders who do refer to trades as scalps are trading on 60-minute charts or smaller, and a scalp is between 10 and 50 pips. All other trades are simply trades. I usually distinguish swings and scalps because I tend to think of them differently. We have a pair of bull bars breaking out. We have a potential high in a trading range, or maybe there was a bear trend here, and maybe this is a bear flag. In either case, we're getting a pretty good breakout, a pair of big bull bars. It's reasonable to buy this close. It's a high probability buy for a scalp, and it's a reasonable buy for a swing trade. Swing trade, with a breakout like this, maybe 50% chance you'll get twice your risk, and maybe 40% chance you'll get more than twice your risk. If a trader exits here, he has 40 pips profit. Is it a scalp or is it a swing? If you're exiting here, I'd probably call it a scalp. You're exiting without any pullback, and you're exiting maybe around twice your risk, maybe less than twice your risk. If a trader exits here, he has 80 pips profit, which is clearly far more than twice his risk if his stop was here or here. And he sat through a pullback, another pullback attempt, and he has two legs up. Minimum goal for a swing trade is 10 bars and two legs. If you buy here, you have one leg, pullback, two leg, and you have more than 10 bars, and you have more than 50 pips profit. All of those things are enough for me to call that a swing trade. In this video, I talked about swing trading and scalping. A scalper is going for a quick profit. He's usually going to exit within one to five bars, and he does not want to allow more than simply a small pullback. A swing trader is going for a reward at least twice as big as the risk, and in general, he's looking for a trade that will last 20 or more bars. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on swing trading and scalping. Take a look in the stock, and it's probably not gonna look very pretty disappointing. Think about how you eat the jackpot and more bars. Learning expensive price hasaki powin. There are drops out of the stock as we start a意識.