 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on trading broad bull channels. Every bull trend needs a series of major higher highs and lows. The major higher lows are very important. A broad channel is very similar to a trading range and it has a lot of trading range price action in it. Like in a trading range, the market often has a second leg trap. A strong second leg that looks like it's about to break out, but it traps traders into a breakout trade and then it reverses. Because a broad bull channel is basically a trading range that's sloped somewhat up, bears will often sell new highs and scale in higher. Likewise, the bulls sell at new highs as well. They sell to take profits. A lot of traders do not like to take a lot of trades. They don't like to get in and then get out and then get in again and get out again. And they're afraid that they'll sometimes miss a big swing trade. For example, let's say a bull bought this reversal. You can call it a wedge bottom, small wedge bottom with a decent bull bar and a lot of good bull bars here. Now we have five consecutive bear bars closing near their lows with decent sized bodies. However, it's still above the bottom of the bull leg. Should bulls get out? Well, some bulls will simply rely on their stop. And as long as their stop does not get hit, and as long as the market does not clearly become bearish, they'll hold long, despite five bear bars closing on their lows like that. A lot of traders will look at this and say, yeah, it's a pretty big reversal down, but we did not have even a micro double top up here. And therefore the bulls have bought the close here should be able to get out, break even. The market should get back up to that close. And therefore, even though we have seven bars down, five good bear bars, it did not fall below the bottom of the bull trend. And we might get a higher low. We have a reversal up here, which is good for the bulls. Suppose a trader bought here and he was willing to sit through pullbacks like that. At some point he has to get up. For example, if he did not get out up here. Now, late in the day, he has a bear breakout and follow through. The market's clearly bearish and unlikely to go back up. Probably will go a little bit more down. Not much time left to the day. He will get out. He gave up a lot of his profit. He bought here. He sold here. He had more profit had he exited there. But some traders do not like to keep getting out and buying again, because a lot of times if they get out, the buy setups never look good enough and they never get back in. If a person is going to hold long and use a swing stop, he'll trail his stop up below every major high or low. A major higher low is a higher low that has a strong reversal up, usually to a new high, but not necessarily. And the bulls at that point, once he sees this or this, will decide that he no longer needs to keep a stop down here. He can put a stop here. And then after he sees a strong breakout here to a new high, he'll trail his stop up from there to below here or below here. Strong breakout to a new high. Bulls will trail their stops. I would use my stop either at the bottom of this bull breakout or the bottom of the bull leg. Sometimes it'll drop below the bull breakout, but not below the bull leg. Either one of these two places is a reasonable location for a stop. Strong breakout above a bear channel. Pretty good bull bars here, here and here. At this point, a lot of traders will raise their stop to below this low. They'll consider it a major higher low. If they're right that it's a bull trend, it should not fall below the major higher low. On the other hand, if it does fall below that major higher low, then it's probably no longer a bull trend. It then probably is a trading range and possibly even a bear trend. In which case, they don't want to be holding long. Another strong breakout. By the close of this bar, we have two good sized bull bars and a new high. Traders will trail their stop to below the bottom of the breakout or below the bottom of the swing up or possibly down here. Again, as long as the market's making major higher lows, then it's still in a bull trend. Most traders are not going to let their stops get hit. Stops are to protect against catastrophe. And if a trader thinks that the premise is no longer valid, or if they think there's a reasonable opposite signal, they'll get out before their stop gets hit. For example, some traders will look at this and say, it's a triangle. It's a big bi-climax late in a bull trend. The triangle is probably a final bull flag. Maybe get out below a bear bar expecting at least a couple of legs down, maybe an endless channel and possibly even a bear breakout. Reasonable to get out up here. Remember, a broad channel is basically a trading range. It's always reasonable to get out of a long near the top of a trading range. When you're in a broad bull channel and you're fairly high up, it's reasonable to get out as well, especially when it's getting late in the day. Now, would some bull buy here? Of course. The reversal down below a major higher low here or here means that the market's no longer in a bull trend, that it's either in a bear trend or a trading range. And if it's in a trading range, it's reasonable to buy a breakout below any support because most breakouts fail. A bull scalper might buy there, betting on at least a bounce. Would I take that buy? No, if anything, I would sell. We're attempting to get a bull flag. Instead, we have a bear breakout and follow through. Both bear bars have good size. One closing on its low, the other closing below its midpoint. The odds are we'll get at least a second leg down. It makes more sense to look to sell here or sell below the pullback bar for a second leg down. Strong bull breakout. A series of bull bars closing on their highs. Very little overlap. The open of this bar is above the close of that bar. And the open of this bar is slightly above the close of that bar. The bulls are so eager to buy, as soon as the bar closes, a lot of them hit by the market. And they get filled on the open of the next bar. Many bull bars here, so good buying pressure here leading up to this breakout. The market's clearly always in long, probably by the close of this bar. Whenever traders see a very deep pullback after a strong bull breakout, they think that the market is probably in a trading range. It might be in a bear channel. We might be getting a series of lower highs, lower lows. It might be in a bull channel, higher highs and higher lows. In general, when you have big up, big down, you have big confusion. And traders tend to buy low, sell high and scalp. Chances are big up, big down, you're going to go sideways, at least for 10 bars or more. Because the trading range is likely, bulls will look to buy a reversal up. They'll buy here. Here we now have a triangle, a small triangle here inside of a bigger triangle. We're still probably always in long, so bulls will buy betting on at least one more leg up. We're still in a bull trend. We're still forming higher lows and higher highs, especially the higher lows. And therefore, it's always reasonable to take the buy signals. And some traders will only take the buy signals as long as it's in a bull channel, making higher lows. And that's reasonable. Let's say you bought above the high of this bar, and then you're filled right here. Your initial stop is here, but your actual risk was only here. You buy above the high of this bar, get filled here, the market traded down here, and then reversed up. At this point, you know that the most you had to risk was one tick below the low of this bar. So that is your actual risk. You can always exit at two times actual risk and have a positive trader's equation. So it's reasonable to exit here. However, when you have a pretty strong reversal up, and the context is good for a swing up, it's usually better not to exit, or at least not to exit all. Minimum scalp size in the E-mini is one point. Theoretically, you could exit at one point if you wanted to, or one times your actual risk, which is right here. Probability is high that we're going up. However, when there's a likelihood that we're going to get a swing up, exiting with the minimum is usually not the best choice. Because it's still possibly a trading range, maybe a two-legged move up, one pull back two, it's reasonable to exit on a reversal down. Especially after we see this, we know the odds are we're going to have a lot of trading range price action, and therefore it's always reasonable to take profits on a reversal down. For example, you could take profits here, you could take profits here, a bear bar and a new high. We have a double top and a bear bar. I mentioned earlier that it was reasonable for bulls to buy this breakout. It's even reasonable to buy closes, including this close. The bulls at this point with this bear bar are disappointed, and a lot of them now have decided that instead of a bull trend, maybe it's a trading range. However, they'll still bet that the market will not fall below the low, and they'll look to add on. A lot of them will buy more above a bull bar as long as the second entry is at least two or three times the size of a scalp below the first. They buy here, they know the odds are high that we'll get back up here. If you take a reasonable buy, this is a reasonable buy of the close. If you take a reasonable buy and you're willing to scale in and use an appropriate stop, the odds are high, maybe 80%, that you'll be able to either make a profit or at least avoid a loss. You can see what happened when we get up to the high close. We found sellers. Who sold? Well, the bulls who bought here are happy to be able to get out without a loss. Some of them bought more here, and they're taking profits up there. And then you have other bulls who got out up here and they bought above here, betting that we would get back up there. The bears know the bulls are doing that, and the bears will sell there as well, knowing that the bulls are selling and that the bears could make a scalp. Second leg traps are common in trading ranges, and broad channels are basically trading ranges that are sloped up or down. Therefore, second leg traps are common in bull channels as well. We have a broad bull channel. Again, it's similar to a trading range that's simply sloped up. And like a trading range, you often have a very strong second leg that fails to lead to a bull trend and instead reverses and traps traders into buying high. Strong second leg up. So we have leg one pull back into a triangle and then a strong second leg up. A lot of traders are hoping that this is going to have a second leg up as well. So break out, they want a second leg up. However, because the market looks like it's in a broad, bold channel, you have to be careful getting excited when you see a strong second leg up. Because very often, instead of a successful breakout, you get a reversal. A strong breakout makes traders believe that the market is starting a trend. We have a triangle here. We have a trading range here. A lot of traders will look at this and say, okay, we'll get a pullback and then we'll channel up and go up much further, maybe for a measured move based upon the size of this breakout. However, whenever the market has a lot of trading range price action or is in a broad channel and you see a strong breakout, you have to be concerned that it might be a second leg trap, trapping traders into buying high when the market is about to reverse. This is a buy the close rally, especially right here, two consecutive big bull bars. You can buy the close, you can buy the close. As far as buying that close with that big tail on top, I would not. This might be a small second leg up from this breakout. Break out and then a small bar for a pause and then a second leg up and now we have a big tail. Can a bull buy that close? Sure. He'll be disappointed by this bar. And if he is, a lot of the bulls will try to get out break even. They'll place a limit order to get out at that close. And look what happened here. The market got right to the close. The bulls did not get filled. It turned down. A lot of the bulls will lower their limit order to a tick or two lower. And that resulted in this lower high. The bulls selling. The bulls who bought that close could not get out here. They lowered their limit order and we got a slightly lower high. That often leads to a swing down. When you see the buy the close bulls desperate to get out and they're having to lower their exit price to take a small loss. The bulls could not get out break even. And then at some point they gave up here. And then the final bulls gave up. And they gave up here. And then the final bulls gave up. Here. that. You can see the bulls in there because he has a 10... 1 Getting up to the brink, it's pwa-1, he's Colombia's EARI ridge, B-ITs. 3 40 20 Hunter 200 5 d 20 55 25 20 22 22 22 23 23 24 25 This is about eight or nine days in a bull trend. It's a broad bull channel, five minute chart. You can get second leg traps up or down. Here we reverse down and now we reverse down even stronger. And this low is below that low, below the low of the past two or three hundred bars. The bears are hoping it's going to be the start of a bear trend. A lot of traders will sell there only to get trapped because if the market's in a broad bull channel or in a trading range, second leg traps are common. You get a strong second leg tricking traders into believing it's the start of a trend, but instead it reverses. You get a failed breakout. This breakout is strong enough to get a small second leg down, 60% chance it'll have at least a small second leg down. It's possible that this small higher low is that second leg down. And it quickly became always in long again with this reversal. It reversed this sell off. We sold off. We tried to get a bear flag. And then we got a bull breakout above the bear flag, almost totally reversing the sell off. So it's always in long. You got to be thinking that maybe it would lead to a measured move up and that's the measured move projection. Traders always pay attention to how far a breakout goes above a breakout point. The market broke out above here. This is the breakout point. And traders pay attention to how far this is above that. We have another high. The market broke out and then pulled back. Traders pay attention to how far this is above that. The market tends to do similar things and breakouts tend to be similar. So subsequent breakouts might break out for about the same distance. We have a breakout point and here's the breakout. When we reverse down, this then becomes a breakout point for this breakout. This high is 10 ticks above that high. And you can look at the size of the breakouts through the entire channel. We have a very big breakout here at 37 ticks. And you can see the sizes of the other breakouts. Bears sell in broad bear channels. They don't have to. You always want to be buying whenever the market's in a broad, bold channel because it's a bold trend. But the pullbacks are deep enough so bears will sell. And part of their selling is based upon the size of those breakouts that I just discussed. Bears need to see gaps closing before they start selling. If they're selling above a high, they want to make sure that the market comes back below the high. For example, if you sell it this high, it did not come back below this high and it would be very difficult to make money unless you scaled in and then got out quickly enough. Before the bears start to sell, do bears want to be selling highs when the market's doing this? Very difficult to make money in a very tight, bold channel like that. The bears need deep pullbacks and they need pullbacks that fall below breakout points. Once they start to see that, then they'll start selling at new highs. Or at least some bears will sell at new highs. We have a very strong reversal up from a break below the bottom of the trading range. And we sold off from a new high. But although you cannot see on this chart, this low never fell below that high. There's actually a gap between the low of that bar and this line, which is at that high. Therefore you're going to be thinking about a possible measuring gap. A measured move up. The bears tried to reverse down from a double top, lower high, major trend reversal. The bulls bought again, forming a double bottom bull flag. And again, the gap stayed open. Probably if the market's going to rally for some kind of a measured move, this is probably a measuring gap. It's clearly an important price. We broke fast above it and we tested it twice and reversed up twice. This is obviously an important price. And now we know this is an important price. The market tested it twice, reversed up without falling below it. And therefore, those two prices will probably create a third important price. If the market is pulling back below breakout points, it's a stairs pattern. And traders pay attention to the size of breakouts to determine where to put stops and where to scale in. If they're looking at shorting in a bull trend. We have a breakout here and a pullback below the breakout. And therefore, if a bear sold that high and sold more higher or simply sold above that breakout point, we now know the bears can make money by selling about breakout points. And once the bears see that, bears are willing to sell above breakout points. Only experienced traders can do that because sometimes you get this. If you sold at this high, the market went up quite a bit and never got back below that high. So you have to be able to manage your trade. And some bears would sell this high, a couple of legs up, they'd sell more here, and then either get out at their midpoint, which the market allowed them to do, or they would try to get out at their original entry, break even at their original buy right here at that high. They would not have been filled. And if they were able to get out, they'd have a profit on their higher entry and break even on their second. After the market twice tried to do that, the scale in bulls who sold more here got out. They got a small loss on their first sell. They sold here and they got out here and they got a bigger profit on their second sell. So basically break even, maybe a little bit of profit, but only skilled traders can do that. And because this sometimes happens when you sell at prior highs, only skilled traders should be selling at prior highs in a bull trend. And they'll only do it if the pullbacks are falling below breakout points. So, why would we get a pullback? Well, the trend has deep pullbacks, so it's not all that strong. Bulls prefer to buy pullbacks instead of buying at new highs, and they tend to use new highs to take profits. They don't necessarily get out exactly at the new high, but if the market starts to stall above a prior high, they'll start to take profits and that results in another pullback. And the bulls buy the pullback and they'll sell again at new highs to take profits. The bears know the bulls are doing that. They can see the reversals down, and they can see the bulls buying well below the high. And therefore, bears sell at new highs, scale in higher, betting that will get a pullback deep enough to allow the bears to make at least a scalp. The traders are constantly drawing lines, especially when there's a broad channel or a trading range. They're looking for support and resistance. And you keep drawing new lines. Every time you get a reversal, you get a new line. You've got lines across the highs. You've got a new high, so it creates a new line. You've got lines below the lows. The ones below are support, the ones above are resistance. And you want to see what the market does when it gets near a line. Will it break strongly beyond the line or will it reverse? Usually it reverses because the lines create channels, and the market tends to reverse near the top and near the bottom of a channel. When we're in a broad bull channel like this, 75% of the breakout attempts at the top and the bottom of the channel will fail. And therefore, traders look to enter on reversals, look to buy reversals up from the bottom and sell reversals down from the top. We have a trend line, traders sell the reversal down. Two points, two reversals down. We can create a trend line, traders sell the reversal down. We have two points here, sell the reversal down, sell the reversal down. All the way up. And bulls will do the opposite. They draw lines along the bottom, and any time the market falls below a line, they buy the reversal up, betting that the bear breakout will fail. If you're selling at a prior high in a bull trend, you have to be able to manage your trade well. This is an advanced technique. This is not something that beginners should be doing. But advanced traders can do it if they can manage their trades properly. And by manage the trades, I mean, use an appropriately wide stop and scale in. By scaling in, they increase their profit. They also increase their risk. Where is an appropriate stop? Well, you have to use a wide stop. And one way to do it is use one based upon a measured move. The bears have a double top here, where this high is slightly higher. If we get a bull breakout above the double top, the market may go up for a measured move. Therefore, a trader selling needs to put a stop slightly above that measured move projection. He knows that the bulls who buy above the double top are going to take profits around the measured move up. And therefore, if a bear sells and looks to sell more higher, he needs a stop beyond that level, where the bulls will sell to take profits. If you are selling at or above prior highs, you need to go for at least a minimum scalp. And in the E-mini, the minimum scalp size is one point. If the bars are big and the range is big, you want to go for more than one point. Also, you want to go for a reward that is at least one to two times your actual risk. If you have a particularly strong setup, and the probability therefore is high 60% or more, then you could exit with one times actual risk. If you have an unremarkable sell setup, then you should be going for at least two times your actual risk. Also, on any trade, you always have to be going for at least one times the size of a minimum scalp. In other words, never go for a profit of less than one point when scalping in the E-mini. The bears who sold at that high made money. The bears who sold at this high had to sit through a drawdown, but ultimately they made money. We have another potential double top. The bears who sell this high might put a stop right above the measured move. We have another potential double top. And here's the neckline. The bears want a break below the neckline and a measured move down. But sometimes instead of a bear breakout, it starts to turn down, but then it goes up. And if it does, it might go up for a measured move. And therefore, if a trader were willing to sell at the prior high, hoping for the double top, but instead the market goes higher, they should have a protective stop beyond a measured move up. And again, only experienced traders should do this. You can use tighter stops if the sell setup is strong enough. If the bars are strong enough, if you have good sell signal bars and a micro double top, you could put a stop just above the high of the sell signal bar. Another attempt at a double top. Bears will sell at that high, willing to scale in higher and use maybe a measured move up. Here's the neckline of the double top. Measured move up is up here. Same thing here. Another sell at a new high. Bears, how do they take profits? They have many different choices. They could exit at a fixed number of ticks, like four points or 16 ticks. Or if the range is small, maybe 1.4 ticks. Or they can exit with a limit order, maybe halfway down from the most recent rally up. Or they could try to get out below a minor higher low. Or they could simply hold until there's a reasonable buy setup, like a reversal up from the bottom of a bull trend line. For example, a bear is selling here. And if he held through this, he might get out at this low. Neckline of a double top, betting the bear breakout would fail. And we get a big high two buy, two legs down. One pull back two, and then a resumption up. We did get a high two buy, but it fell much further than what traders thought was likely. Again, you can sell and hold until you got two legs down and then buy on a reversal up. For example, you can buy back your short down here. Here's an example of traders selling at a prior high. You cannot see it, but there's a micro double top. Once the market starts to turn down, a lot of traders will put their stop above the high, especially if it was a strong sell signal bar. If you're selling in a bull trend, you have to have a plan to get out if the market goes against you, especially if it goes against you quickly and far. Again, I mentioned before that traders look at the size of prior breakouts. One option is you look at the biggest prior breakout and put a stop just beyond twice as big as that breakout. This high went 10 ticks above this. This high went 17 ticks above that. A trader might put a stop more than 17 ticks above here. You may go twice as much like 34 ticks above there. 35, 36 ticks. Minimum scalp in the E-mini is four ticks. Minimum reward is always one to two times the actual risk, but it has to be at least bigger than a minimum scalp of one point. These legs are big. Some of them are 10 points or more, and scalping for one point is probably not the best choice. Going for the minimum in life for anything is rarely ever the best choice. When the channel is 10 points from top to bottom, going for a one or two point scalp is probably a bad decision. There's much more profit potential. For example, you could double your profit. So if you were thinking that one times actual risk is one point and two times is two points and it's not very big compared to the size of the prior pullbacks, double it. Go for a four points profit, five points profit. You could also exit around a 50% pullback from the most recent bull leg. Bull leg, 50% pullback. If you sold up here, that would be a reasonable place to take profits because the bulls like to buy 50% pullbacks. And you can see that's what happened. The bulls bought. Some traders will hold for a swing down, taking a chance that we have a successful double top. It would be a double top major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout, double top. It's actually an expanding triangle in here as well. One, two, three, four, five. So they might hold for two legs down and possibly a bear trend. However, once it broke below the bottom of a trading range lasting that many bars, a couple hundred bars, and started to reverse up, a lot of traders would buy back their shorts, afraid that it's a second leg trap. One pullback, two, in a trading range or in a broad bull channel. No strategy is perfect. You're going to lose on some trades. And let's say you've been scalping at prior highs all day long and you decide to sell here as well. In general, I think that's not a good idea. We just had a failed breakout below the bottom of the range and a strong reversal up. So I would not take that sell. But let's say you did sell at that high. Betting on maybe a possible expanding triangle. Maybe we will turn down here or soon like here. Different ways to draw the expanding triangle. This is another way to draw it. Let's say a trader was using a wide stop based upon a measured move up from the bottom to the top of the trading range up here and put the stop a little bit above. His stop did not get hit. However, he's clearly going to be disappointed by the rally that continued after his sell and he probably would try to get out break even. Experienced traders would also sell more scaling in trying to get a profit on their second entry and break even on their first. Yet, as I said, twice the market tried to get below the breakout point and it failed both times. Therefore, this is a double bottom breakout test. The reversal up here is probably going up for some kind of a measured move. And the bears who did sell here, whether or not they scaled in higher, are going to get out above this bar and they'll end up with a loss on this sell. And bulls will buy because it's the double bottom bull flag and a breakout test of the top of the trading range with no overlap. Experienced traders often scale into trades. Sometimes they scale in to make a profit. Other times they scale in simply to avoid a loss. Some of the traders who see this strong rehearsal up and strong breakout after taking this short are going to be scaling in to avoid a loss. So they sell, they sell more higher. This higher short is not to make a profit for some of them. Some of them is simply to avoid a loss on the trade and they want to get out at the average entry price. If you are willing to scale in, you have to make sure that whatever number of entries you take will not result in a loss bigger than what you're comfortable taking. So you always have to trade small enough so that if your stock is hit, the loss is no bigger than on any other trade. The reason traders scale in is to increase their probability of making money, but that always reduces the risk reward ratio. It usually results in significantly increased risk. Only experienced traders should ever consider doing it. Some traders will scale in at a fixed number of points, maybe five points higher. Others will sell more at a new high, like above this high right there. Some will sell halfway up to their stock. Others will wait to sell a reversal back down. That's the way I think most traders should do it if they're scaling in. They take their original entry and then wait for a reversal down and make sure that the second entry is at least two to three times bigger than a scalp. The scale in bulls who sold here and then added at any one of these other places, once they see the double bottom failing to get below their first entry price, will get out on the reversal up. They'll have a small loss on the first entry and a slightly bigger profit on their second entry, basically break even on the entire trade. They ended up scaling in to avoid a loss. They wanted to make a profit. They could not make a profit, but they were able to avoid a loss. I have a close-up of this on the next slide. This is the last slide. I put it down as a thumbnail. I'm going to show the close-up of it right here. This purple box is this purple box, and this is that breakout point, this red line right here. And you can see the market got very close to the breakout point twice, but it never got down to the breakout point. So the bears are sold at that high. They placed a limit order to sell at this high. They got filled right here. This is where they got filled. The market never came back below their entry price and they therefore were never able to get out break even on their first entry. So, as I said, some of the bears will scale in more, especially below a bear bar closing near its low. This is a reasonable place to scale in. Not a good sell signal bar, not a good sell signal bar. This is a better sell signal bar. Again, the traders are only doing this if they're relying on their stock. Also, they're willing to hold overnight for a lot of bars. Most traders would not do this, but some experienced traders would. They're going to have a micro double bottom here and a gap between this pullback and the breakout point. They'll get out above the bull bar on the micro double bottom. Others will hold, hoping to get a second leg down after the gap down and strong bear bars. And they'll get out here, another second reversal up or here, a big high two buy. Again, a breakout chest of the breakout point, never getting below it. Plus the end of the day. If they sell more here compared to here, they have a profit on this entry for any of these exits. That's bigger than the loss. Some base the sell size when selling above a prior high. They base the sell size on the size of the prior breakout. This breakout is 10 ticks above that. This high is 17 ticks above that. This one's eight ticks above that. So they might sell eight ticks above here and maybe more eight ticks higher. Again, stop probably has to be a measured move up because the bulls have a double bottom and we could go all the way up to their measured move target before pulling back. Why would a trader sell here instead of here? Because the reversal up is so strong. He might think the breakout might be bigger than eight ticks might be bigger than 10 ticks. And therefore you don't want to sell exactly at that high. You want to sell at least as big as the smallest prior breakout. So at least eight ticks above this high. If a trader is disappointed by the size and strength of the breakout, he can then place an order to get out break even and he would have been able to get out without a loss on the open of the next day. If he scaled in more, he'd have a profit on his second entry and he'd get out break even on his first. Again, if he was still short, he'd have to get out on the double bottom bull flag, especially since neither low fell below the breakout point. That is a sign of strong bulls. We have an open gap after a strong breakout. The odds are the market's going higher. You always have to have a plan to take profits and the bulls like to take profits at or above the prior high. Some bulls take their profits based upon the size of prior breakouts. So instead of exiting exactly at the prior high, they'll look at how big the prior high is above the high before it. And then they'll look for a similar result this time. A 10 tick breakout, 17 tick breakout, 8 tick breakout. If a bull bought this reversal up, he might get out at this high, but he also might get out instead at eight ticks above it, maybe even 17 ticks above it, given how strong the reversal up is. Once the market has this strong reversal up, it's more likely that the market is either back into a bull trend or simply in a trading range. If a bull trend is going to be a little bit more, he'll look at the price of the price of the price. Because the reversal up is strong, he sees how far the prior breakouts went before they reversed. He'll try to take profits around that same number of ticks above this high. For example, taking profits at 8 ticks up or twice 8 ticks or around 17 ticks up would make sense. Instead of taking profits exactly at this high, you can bet that the breakout will go further up just like it went above here. And this went above there by 10 ticks. A bull trend needs higher lows, especially major higher lows. And as long as the market is staying above a major higher low, it's still in a bull trend, even if there are strong sell-offs in the bull trend. Second leg traps are common in trading ranges and in broad channels. A broad bull channel is basically a trading range that's tilted up slightly. Very often, you'll get one leg up, a pullback, and then an even stronger leg up. And traders believe that the market is becoming a very strong bull trend. Much more likely, it's trapping traders into buying high, and then the market will reverse. Bears sometimes sell in broad bull channels. They'll sell at and above prior highs using a wide stop. Some will scale in. Bulls will take profits above prior highs or at prior highs. And a lot of times, they'll base the profit-taking location based upon the size of prior breakouts. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on trading broad bull channels. Jeff and configalaiscover the