 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading and tight bull channels. The first thing I want to talk about is how to buy when you have a tight bull channel. Next I want to talk about management. Where do you put your stops and when do you take profits? And finally, it's important to realize that all tight channels eventually evolve into trading ranges. The channel here is fairly tight. The pullbacks are only a bar. Here we didn't even pull back below the low of the prior bar. And here we got a brief pullback. Not very deep. The channel is tight. On a higher timeframe chart, it's a breakout. And you trade it like a breakout. Which means you should focus on buying instead of looking to trade in both directions. At this point, we have a breakout and a follow through and then another follow through bar. And we try to reverse back down, but we found support at the top of the trading range. We do not yet know if it's going to be a tight bull channel, but the breakout is strong enough so that the odds are traders will get at least a second leg up. Here, here, here. At this point we have seven bars with higher lows. Six or seven bars with higher lows. And it is an early tight bull channel. If you buy for any reason after this initial rally, your initial stop is going to be below the most recent strong breakout. Once you get another breakout, you can use a tighter stop below the most recent major higher low. A major higher low is a higher low where you have a strong breakout, usually to a new high. Let's say you're planning on buying this close. The first thing you have to look at is where a logical stop would be. And it would be below the bottom of the breakout, maybe below the bottom of the bull trend. Once you're confident that the market is going to have at least a second leg higher, it's reasonable to go ahead and just buy at the market. As soon as you see this bar close, you hit buy the market and you'll get filled on the open of the next bar. Or you can place a buy the market order a second or two before the bar closes and simply rely on your stop. At this point, there's a high probability that you'll get some kind of a measured move up based upon the height of this breakout. Maybe from the open of the first bar to the close of the second bar, which would be somewhere up here. Once the market starts channeling up, here we have a micro channel. Micro channel means the low of a bar is above or at the low of the prior bar. And at this point, we have four, five, six, seven bars where every low is either at or above the low of the prior bar. That's a sign of a strong bull. It's a tight channel and on a higher timeframe chart, it is a breakout. And therefore, you can trade it exactly like you would a breakout. Buy for any reason. There's one thing that's different between a tight channel and a breakout. Even though it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart, in general, it's better to buy reversal attempts. You buy when the market is trying to go down. So you buy with limit orders below this bar, or now we have a pullback and you can buy a reversal up. Rather than buying above this high. At this point, you know there's going to be a second leg up. And then at this point, and then through here, you know you have a tight bull channel and you're probably going quite a bit higher. You know it's going higher. Therefore, that means you have at least a 60% confidence that it's going higher. Yet it never really feels like 60%. But as a trader, 60% certainty is as good as it gets. And therefore, you have to figure out how to buy. An obvious choice is just buy at the market or buy the close or right around the close right before, right after the bar closes. You can buy the breakout close better yet, higher probability to buy the close of a follow through bull bar or the bar after that. The bears are trying to reverse the trade, but the odds even after this big bear bar are that we'll get at least a little bit more. Or that we'll get at least a small second leg up and therefore you can buy the bear close betting that it will not totally reverse the breakout. We have three consecutive bull bars here, a bad sell signal bar. This is a bull inside bar. That lowers the probability that this will be a successful failed breakout and the start of the bear trend. It's more likely a 50% pullback of this rally and a test of the breakout point, these highs and the high of this doji bar. If you cannot decide what to do and you see it starting to reverse up, you simply buy the market. And that is a very easy way to trade. You know where the stop is, you just buy the market. You don't know that it's going all the way up here, but you know that there's a high probability better than 60% it's going up. Beginners naturally are afraid to buy when the market is falling in a bull trend and that's reasonable. But the math is still good to take the buy if you rely on your stop. Buying pullbacks is always a good strategy whenever you're in a bull trend. Also betting that bear reversals will fail and become bull flags is also a good strategy. Here for the bears, they're hoping that the breakout will fail. However, the odds of it failing after three consecutive bull bars and with this being a bull bar for the sell signal bar are small. And therefore, probably buyers below the low of this bar and you can place a limit order to buy at the low of that bar. You get filled here and stopped down here. You can also buy a one or two point pullback below a strong close. Strong close here, strong close there. Just place a limit order to buy one or two points down. Then you have a strong bear bar, but the bears need more than one bar to create a reversal. This is more likely a test of the breakout point than it is the start of a bear trend. And therefore, again, you could simply buy the close. As soon as you see the bar close, you just hit buy the market. Again, stop down here. Because it's a channel, it's not likely to have five or ten consecutive bull bars without any bear bars. You're going to get pullbacks. And that means there'll be many opportunities to buy below the high. For example, buy below a bull bar, betting that it's a terrible sell signal bar and that the market's going higher. Again, as I said, you could buy lower. In fact, you could scale in lower. Wherever your first entry is, you could buy more one or two points down, assuming you're trading a small enough position size so that you can scale in. Pullback testing support. The top of the trading range. It's also about a 50% pullback. You could buy with a limit order at that high or just above this high. Or a limit order at a 50% pullback, which is also around the same price. Here's the start of the breakout. Here's the top of the breakout. This is around a 50% pullback. We have a bull bar after the bear bar. So that is a bad bear reversal attempt. And it's also a bull flag. We pulled back for three bars. We have a bull bar, a buy signal bar, reversing up from a test of support. You can buy with a stop just above the high of this bull bar and you get filled right here. The market has been above the moving average all day to this point. That is maybe 50 or 60 bars above the moving average. Traders have been willing to buy above the average price. So what's going to happen when it finally gets down to the average price? They're going to buy. And therefore, traders will place a limit order to buy either at the moving average or one tick above the moving average. And they could get filled right around here. You can buy a breakout at the prior high. So for example, you can place a stop order to buy at this high. You get filled just above that high. However, bulls, when there are channels, tend to take profits when the market gets to a prior high. Therefore, the bulls who bought for any reason down here would take partial or full profits here. Since this is always in long and early in a trend, I think bulls will take at most only partial profits. You can see the tail on the top of this bar and the bear bar that followed. And that is a sign that bulls took profits. You also have limit order bears selling at this high, hoping that this is going to become a trading range and not a bull trend. However, when the market did not continue down, the bears had to buy back the shorts. We have a bull I-I. We have a bull inside bar and this bar is an inside bar. So it's an I-I. Second bar has a bull body. It's a bull I-I. The bears who did sell at that high will buy back the shorts above this bull I-I. And the bulls who took partial profits, a lot of them will buy more above this bar, betting that we're starting a second leg up. It's a channel, getting reversal attempts repeatedly, but it's also a bull trend. And therefore, you can buy at any time, including on a stop and a breakout above a prior high. However, as I said, when the market is channeling, it's usually better to buy pullbacks. And if you prefer stop entries, you could look for any kind of a pullback and place a stop to buy above the high of a bull bar and get filled here. A pullback, even though it's an I-I and it did not go below the low of the prior bar, you can buy on a stop above the high of this bull inside bar. Or here. Or here. You can also buy any strong bull close. Here. Here. Here. Here. Here. Here. However, buying bull closes at new highs, especially after the market has rallied for 20 or more bars, becomes risky because the chance of a deeper pullback becomes greater. Later in a bull trend, it becomes even more important to not buy the strong breakouts and instead buy pullbacks because every bull channel eventually evolves into a trading range. Let's say you bought this high. The stop is always going to be below the most recent major higher low. This is probably a minor higher low. We went to a new high, but it was only a one bar breakout and the bar is not all that big. I think this is a more major higher low. So if you bought for any reason through here, by the time the market gets up here, this is where the stop goes below this low. If you did buy this close, the high close of the entire bull trend, and you relied on your stop, and you saw the market sell off for the next 10 bars or so, you can place an order to buy more above a bull bar. Like for example here. Can you buy above this bar? When I'm scaling in in a situation like this where I bought a high close and I'm looking to buy more above a bull bar, I prefer the second order to be at least two or three points below the first. Two to three times the size of a minimum scalp. In the E-mini, a minimum scalp is one point. And therefore, if I'm going to add on, I prefer to add on two or three points below. So I would not buy above this bull bar. However, buying above this bull bar makes sense. Again, relying on that stop. And again, you only do it if you're trading small enough so that your risk is no bigger than on any other trade. Let's say you're a bull who bought here, then you bought more here. Are you happy with what you see here? Of course not. You're disappointed. We have over here six or seven bars without a bull bar and the bars are starting to get small. We're starting to go sideways. So you're going to conclude that it's no longer a strong bull trend. It might simply be a trading range. You bought here on the assumption that it was going to be a continuation of the bull channel and it's not. We're starting to go sideways. We're going to build all the bulls on the bulls. And because it's no longer a strong bull trend, you'll probably want to get out around your original entry. So a lot of the bulls will switch to trading range mode at this point. They'll look to get out of their trade around here. They get out break even on this buy, and then they have a profit here. Remember, you're buying here, hopefully, about two points below there. So you get a two-point profit here, and then you just wait to see what happens next. The bears see this, and they know the bulls are disappointed, and they know the market's transitioning into a trading range, and they know the bulls will try to get out around the high close. And because of that, bears will start selling for scalps right around where the bulls will give up, which is at that high close. In general, whenever the market is in a channel, especially when the channel is tight, any time the market pulls back a third to a half of the prior bull leg, the bulls will start to buy. We rallied, and this is pulling back about a third of this leg up. We rallied, this is pulling back about a half. When the pullbacks are small, like they are here, really difficult for the bears to make money. If they sell this high for a scalp, did they make money over here? Probably not, and the market's resuming up. Whenever you look at a chart, and you think about it from the perspective of limit order bears, bears selling with limit orders at the prior high, and you see that it's very difficult for the bears to make money, that means the market is going to go higher. Therefore, you should be looking to buy. And you should especially be looking to buy every reversal down, believing that it's likely the bears will get trapped. The reversal down will be minor, which means it will become either a bull flag or a trading range, and the odds of it leading to a trend reversal are small. Even here, it became a trading range, and the bulls were able to avoid a loss. The odds that the first reversal down is going to turn into a bear trend are small. Usually, the market has to sell off for 10 or more bars, and then resume up and fail around the prior high. At that point, the bears have a chance of a reasonable sell-off. But until you get this sell-off and the test of the prior high, the odds of this are small. And therefore, bulls can buy for any reason, until after they see this. Again, here's a leg up. Bulls will be looking to buy any reversal down that retraces about a third of the rally to about half of the rally. This is a third, this is a 33% pullback, and here's a 50% pullback. It did not quite get there, but that's the buy zone between a third and a half. That's where bulls start looking to buy again. You can buy with a limit order at a 33% retracement or at a 50% retracement. Here, it never hit the 50% retracement. So if you tried to buy with the limit order, you would not be filled. Instead, you could buy a high 2 bull flag. High 1 above this bar, and now we have a high 2, and we have a bull body. So that's even higher probability. You can buy with a stop on that reversal back up above that buy signal bar. When a channel is tight, usually the pullbacks only last one, two, or three bars before the bull trend resumes. We have a 1 bar pullback. We have a 1 bar pullback that does not even go below the low of the prior bar. We have a 2 bar pullback here. It extended. We have a 3 bar, 3 lower bar. This bar is below there. This bar is below here. This bar is below here. It's actually probably a 6 or 7 bar pullback, but only 3 of the bars went below prior lows. We have another pullback here for a few bars. We have a 1 bar pullback here. That is a small pullback bull trend, and it usually means the market is going higher. And that's a sign of a very tight bull channel. If all the pullbacks are very brief like that, that means the market is probably going higher. Because the pullbacks are 1 bar, 1 bar bulls will buy at the low of the prior bar, believing that the pullback will only last 1 or 2 bars, maybe 3 bars, and certainly not fall very far. You can buy with a limit order below the low of the prior bar, especially if the bar has a bull body like this, like that, like that. Those are low probability cells, and therefore you can buy at the low of those reversal attempts. Another thing you can do is, if the pullback is likely only going to be 1, 2 or 3 bars, instead of buying below the low of the first bar, you can wait for a 1 bar pullback and then buy at the low of that bar. You can also buy at the low of the second pullback bar. This bar went below the low of that bar. That's a 1 bar pullback. This bar went below the low of this bar, so it's a 2 bar pullback. You can place a limit order to buy at the low of that bar, and you get filled over here, betting that the pullback will not last more than 1, 2 or 3 bars. Again, even if you are buying in what turns out to be the start of a bear trend, the market will be forgiving, because the first attempt to get a reversal, the first significant attempt, is probably not going to succeed without the market first testing back up at the prior high. Even if you buy here and the market keeps going down, the odds are high that you'll be able to get out, at least break even, that the market will come back to your entry price and you'll be able to avoid a loss. When you have several reasons to buy, if you take one of these buys and then you see another buy signal, another one, another one, another one, another one, in general, you will not take the additional buys. You'll take one. Maybe you'll take a second or third if you can get it one or two times the size of a scalp lower. So the minimum scalp in the E-mini is one point, and if you buy there, maybe you'll buy more one point lower or two points lower. But you're not going to be taking these entries if they're all within a point or so of one another. Also, you're not going to be taking them if it creates risk that's greater than your acceptable risk. If you're taking any of these buys, your stop is down here and you do not want your position size to be bigger than what it should be in order to keep your risk within a reasonable level. At this point, we have an 8 bar pullback in a very tight bear channel. That's a good sign that the momentum is waning and the market's probably beginning to transition into a trading range. So, if you bought, assuming that this channel was going to continue up, and now you think it's not, it's going sideways, you're disappointed. And you'll decide that the style of trading is no longer appropriate, and therefore you want to get out around break even. You're buying in a way that's appropriate for a bull channel, but if it's now a trading range, that's not how you want to be trading it. So, you'll get out of your trade around break even. I'm going to talk a little bit now about stops and profit taking. Let's say you buy the close of the follow-through bar after this breakout. You have a two bar breakout. An initial reasonable stop is below the bottom of the breakout, although you could also put it below the bottom of the bull trend. It doesn't matter where you bought in here, anywhere in here, this is where your stop goes. And that's true of any leg. It doesn't matter where you buy in here, you're using the same stop. Here, below the most recent major high or low. Your entry price has nothing to do with the stop. The location of the most recent major high or low is the only thing that matters. The location of the top is the only thing that you buy in here. Anytime there's a reasonably strong breakout, especially to a new high, you move your stop up to below the bottom of that breakout. That's trailing your stop up. Breakout, new high, reasonably strong breakout. If you're bending on a channel, it should not fall below this low after breaking to a new high. Since you're buying on the premise that it's a channel, if it goes below there, then your premise is wrong and you want to get out. So it's appropriate to have you stop there. Another breakout, not all that strong, but we have a bull bar closing on its high. We have three consecutive bull bars. Reasonable to put your stop below the bottom of that channel, below that bull bar, maybe below that bear bar. Another breakout to a new high, decent bull bar. Reasonable to put your stop below the bottom of the leg up or below this low. Another breakout, even though it's only a one bar breakout, it's a breakout to a new high. It's also getting late in the trend and you have to be thinking that the market is not going to go up forever. We have consecutive breakouts here, here, here, here, here, here, here. Usually that transitions into a trading range. And because of that, I think you have to be thinking that you want to get out quicker. And therefore it's reasonable to put your stop here after simply a one bar breakout. Also, this is the biggest bull bar and maybe 20 bars. Whenever you see the biggest bull bar after a trend that's going on 20 or more bars, it's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend than it is the start of a new leg up. And that's another reason to put your stop here. If it gets down here, you don't want to be long because your premise of a bull channel is no longer valid. It's probably now in a trading range. Let's say you're buying for scalp here or buying for scalp here or here for any reason. You're still going to be using the swing stop. It's usually the best choice. It gives you higher probability. And it's especially good if you're able to scale in. So if a bull scalper bought, let's say here, it's better to use this stop and not put a stop here. So they buy above this bar, get filled here. Better to put a stop down here so they can buy more if it gets lower because you don't want to be stopped out. And then have it reverse up again on a high two bull flag. High one, high two. Or let's say you buy above this bar, I would put the stop down here because we might get one more little push down below that low. And again, you don't want to get stopped out at that point with a high three, a wedge bull flag. Pretty late in the bull trend to be buying highs, but we have a trading range and now we're breaking out and we have follow through. It's okay to buy that close if you use the appropriate stop. Can you put the stop below the low of this one breakout bar? You probably can because if your premise is right that this is the start of a new leg up, it should not drop below the low of this bar. Also, we're getting pretty late in the trend. And whenever you see a big bull bar late in a trend, especially if it's bigger than the prior 20 bars, there's an increased risk that the trend will end soon. This is a strong enough breakout so that we'll probably get a second leg up. This is a strong enough breakout for maybe more up, but you were expecting a second leg. And this is the second leg. You can buy this close. I personally would not buy that close. I would wait to see what we get. In any case, let's say you buy this close. Either stop is reasonable. A tighter stop, you'll get stopped out more often, but you'll lose less when you do get stopped out. A wider stop, when you do lose, you lose more than with this stop, but you'll get stopped out less often. A wider stop has higher probability of making money, but the risk is greater. Both stops are reasonable and therefore you can use either one. And if you take this trade a hundred times using this stop stop, your profit will be about the same. Because it's a bull trend, at least you believe it's going to be a bull trend, it's always reasonable to swing at least part of your trade. Most traders should be swinging all. So if they buy this close, for example, it's better to be swinging most or all of your trade. Again, because it's an early trend, the probability of making a reward at least equal to your actual risk is at least 60% when you use the appropriate stop. If you buy this close, your initial risk is one tick below the low of this bar. And once the market resumes up to this point, you now know that your actual risk was to one tick below the low of this bar. You buy here, your actual risk was here. 60% chance you're going to have at least a profit of one times your actual risk. That is an acceptable trader's equation. When you have a reasonably strong breakout, 60% chance the market's going to go up for some kind of a measured move. And therefore, the minimum you need for a positive trader's equation is a profit that is only one times actual risk. This is one times actual risk. And you can see what happened when the market got there. Some traders took profits. And that's what caused that. It's a reasonable swing trade. And it's therefore reasonable to swing all of your position. You should certainly be swinging at least part of your position. And look what happened when the market went to one times initial risk. You buy here. Initially, your stop is below the low of this bar. And this is one times initial risk. And you can see what happened. More profit taking. So some computers are taking partial profits at one times actual risk. If the actual risk is fairly small, instead, they'll use one times initial risk. So other computers took profits up there. The probability is high. And therefore, taking profits at one times actual risk or initial risk is reasonable. Certainly taking profits at two times actual or initial risk is reasonable. And swing trading the rest of your position makes sense. Most traders should be swing trading at least half of their position. When do you exit? Well, you exit when there are a couple decent reasons for traders to assume the trend is ending. And it might be transitioning into a trading range. And then you can exit your position on a stop order on a reversal down from the resistance or with a limit order right around the resistance. Resistance. One times actual risk is always resistance. Reasonable to take partial profits there. One times initial risk is also resistance. It's resistance because some computers will be taking profits there, which means the market will probably stall there. Reasonable to take partial profits there. So, every channel eventually ends. 25% of channels break out and become an even stronger trend, maybe less than that. 75% break to the downside and the bull channel becomes a trading range. 75% break to the downside. Traders can trade it like a channel until it's no longer a channel. Whenever a trend goes on 20 or more bars, traders should begin to look for signs that the channel might be evolving into a trading range. You can see there was an attempt to do that here. We have a wedge. 1, 2, 3. And we have a couple legs sideways. 1, pull back 2. This subdivided into 1, pull back 2. However, the bull trend resumed. We have a rally here. And then an attempt to reverse. But whenever you have a tight bull channel like this, the first reversal attempt probably is going to result in a trading range or a bull flag. 5,5omma 150.6 tua. And this is the baiter. That fence. Now when it's like a wishburn party. 5, 40% and will simply be able to pull the bet. 30% of our weight és a bull trend here, exercidences like that DANA 4, ice would be about two. 2, one observed 4. 4 by 8. We have consecutive tops. We have a wedge top here. Not likely to fall very far because the channel is tight. The bull trend resumed, but now we have a second wedge top. Whenever there are consecutive tops, there's a higher chance that the trend will end and either become a trading range or reverse into an opposite trend. Whenever you have a high two buy setup, here's a high one, high two, and then here's a bigger high two. This is a high one, high two, but it's also a bigger high one. So this is a high one. This is a high two. Whenever you have a high two that occurs 20 or more bars into a bull trend, there's at least a 50% chance it'll be the final bull flag. And that means that you'll get a leg up and then a pullback into a trading range or a deep pullback into a very big trading range. I mentioned this earlier. Whenever you have a relatively big bar, big compared to the past 20 bars, occurring 20 or more bars into a bull trend, it's more likely to be an exhaustion move than a breakout into an even stronger bull trend. At the close of this bar, there's a gap between its close and the high of the prior bar. Chances are that gap is going to close. So that means chances are you'll get a pullback that falls below the high of this bar. It's especially likely if the bar following the breakout is a bad follow through bar for the bulls. And here we have a reversal bar with a bare body. We have a breakout, probably going to get a second leg up. And we have a second leg up. We're not necessarily going to get a third or fourth leg up. And therefore, the minimum goal after this breakout has been achieved. Another reason for traders to take profits. We have a breakout bar. And bad follow through by the close bulls are disappointed. You're starting to get a series of dojis. That usually leads to some kind of a trading range. I think it's reasonable to take final profits below this bare bar because of all that I said. Leg one, leg two, consecutive tops, wedge, wedge, possible final flag. Expect a second leg up after this. First leg, second leg, and the biggest bull bar, late in a bull trend, probably an exhaustion bar. Reasonable to take profits there. We have a series of buy climaxes. Every trend bar, every series of trend bars is a climax. This, this, this, a little bit here, here, here, here, usually evolves into a trading range. Usually you'll get 10 bars, two legs sideways to down. Maybe leg one, pull back leg two. Tight channel, so maybe leg one, pull back leg two. Big bear bar. Increasing bear bars. We have a doji. And now we have a bear body. We have a bigger bear body. And a bigger bear body. This is a sign that the remaining bulls are giving up. Some bulls, after this breakout, put their stop below here, arguing it's another major higher low. However, I would not do that because at this point it's a trading range. And I'm going to be selling out of longs on a reversal down after any rally. I'm not going to rely on a stop. This is a trend stop. And at this point the market's probably in a trading range and no longer in a trend. And you can see a lot of traders gave up. And a lot of traders did in fact sell below this low. For me, I would sell below this bear bar. This is caused by the remaining bulls taking profits and the bears seeing the market turning down. And they know the bulls will give up. So the bears are selling as well. Big bear bar. A surprise bar. A surprisingly big bar. The biggest bear bar of the entire day. We know the bulls are giving up. Probably will get at least a second leg down. And therefore, it's reasonable to sell that close. Expecting that any reversal up will form a lower high and we'll get a second leg down. We have three consecutive bear bars. Each one getting stronger. All three closing at or near their lows. Strong bear reversal. The bulls are hoping this is a big high two buy. Leg one, pull back leg two. They have a bull body here. But this is so strong. The odds are the reversal up will fail and we'll get a second leg down. And therefore, bears will sell at the high of the prior bar above this bar, especially since it has a bear body. Stop up here. The top of the most recent major lower high in a new bear trend. We have three legs up. We have a bull bar here and then a bear bar. Two bull bars and then a bear bar and then a bull bar. So there's three pushes up. It's a wedge rally. It's a double top with the top of the sell climax high. It's a test of the breakout point. It's around a 50% pullback. Even though it has a bull body. I think the market's always in short. Reasonable to sell on a stop below the low of that bull bar and get filled right here. A low two bear flag. Low one, pull back low two. I think of it more as a wedge. Up, down, up, down, and then up again. We have a very tight bull channel and then we have a break below the trend line. The channel is very, very tight. The reversal is probably going to be minor. It becomes a bull flag or a trading range. However, every time a tight bull trend has a correction that breaks below the trend line. You can draw a new line. You'll see that the lines get less steep and the channel gets broader. And eventually the market transitions into a trading range. We can draw a new line after this reversal up. We broke below it. We resumed up. You can draw a new line. You can see the lines are getting less steep. The trend is becoming flatter. And it's also becoming broader. It was very tight right here. If I draw a line across the top of the channel, you can see the trend is becoming broader. Another attempt to reverse up. You can draw another line and you can see the trend is becoming less steep. It's becoming flatter and flatter and flatter. And eventually it evolves into a trading range. It's a trading range at this point. This is probably going to be a bare leg in a trading range. And this entire collection of bars is probably going to end up as a trading range for the next day. Big up, big down, big confusion. Big up, big down, big down. Because you'll see that the market probably will go sideways for the next 20 or 30 bars. Very tight bull trend, and it evolved into a trading range once it's in a trading range, breakout mode, 50% chance there will be a successful bull breakout, 50% chance there'll be a successful bear breakout, 50% chance the first breakout will fail and reverse. Anytime a trend lasts 20 or more bars, you should look for signs that it might evolve into a trading range. This channel is so tight, it was unlikely to be the end of the bull trend. But here we have a second wedge top, 1, 2, 3, after this wedge top, higher probability that we would soon evolve into a trading range. Very strong bull trend, it's a small pullback bull trend, we only have a 1 bar pullback. This bar is a bear bar and doesn't even pull back. This is the first pullback in a very strong bull trend. The odds are it'll become a pause in the bull trend, a bull flag, and that will get trend resumption up. However, we've had the trend resumption up and now we're starting to get a lot of very small bars, doji bars, bear bars, and this is probably the end of the bull trend. The probability that we're going higher after you see about 10 bars is no longer 60%. It becomes 50% once you start to get 10 or 20 bars in a very tight range like this. 50% chance you're going higher. 50% chance you're going lower. 50% chance the bull trend will resume. 50% chance the bull trend will reverse into a bear trend. 50% chance the bull trend will be a very strong bull channel. All channels eventually end. We have a spike up here, a pullback, and now we're starting to channel up. 75% chance whenever you have any channel, you'll get a bear breakout, a break below the bottom of the channel. The breakout can be down or it can simply be sideways. 25% chance you'll get a bull breakout above a bull trend and then an even stronger bull trend. Here we have the bear breakout and the bull trend resumed and it became a broader bull channel. It was very tight here and it became broader here. I began with talking about many ways to buy in a very tight bull channel. Again, when the channel is tight, you should only be looking to buy. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. And next I talked about where to put stops. If you're buying in a bull trend, you should be putting your stop below the most recent major, high or low. And where to take profits. Your minimum goal is always 1 times actual risk if it's a trend because if it's a trend, the probability of making your profit before hitting your stop is 60% or higher. If 1 times actual risk is too small, then go for 1 times initial risk. And if the trend is strong, try to swing at least half of your trade. Do not scalp your entire position. And finally, all channels, whether or not they're tight, evolve into trading ranges. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fourth of four videos on trading tight bull channels. close your cost. That's true that you're taking a smaller transfer. In that area, the third of five minutes of trading range is gonna be close below the fx programs, so you can find down below the sensitive side for impacting center. Thank you.