 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the eighth of eight videos on breakouts. Big trend bars are common on all charts, but some of them are really important and I call them surprise bars. If the context is good, a surprise bar can lead to a new trend, either a breakout of a trading range or a reversal of the current trend. However, if the market is in a trading range or in a broad channel, a very strong breakout could in fact simply trap traders into believing a trend is starting when in fact the channel or trading range will continue. Therefore, a strong breakout often is a second leg trap. It sometimes can represent exhaustion if it occurs late in a trend. If the market is in a trend, sometimes you'll see a strong trend bar in the wrong direction. If the bar is not especially big, it usually leads to a minor reversal. For example, a couple legs against the trend before the trend tries to resume. Most charts have lots of trend bars. Bars up and down. Big bodies up and down. And they don't give you much information. However, a surprise bar is an unexpected bar. You're getting a big bar in the wrong place or a big bar in the wrong direction at a time when you think it's unlikely. By definition, surprise means a low probability event. The surprise bar is telling you that something has changed. The price is wrong. The market has to move to a new price. And this is true for any time frame. Whether it's a 5 minute chart like this, a 1 minute chart, a monthly chart. For example, we have a bull trend, a bull breakout, and then a surprisingly big bear bar. It's not a major trend reversal, although sometimes it can lead to a major trend reversal. However, it's surprisingly big. And whenever something happens that's surprisingly big like that, usually there'll be a second leg. So, 1, pull back 2. Maybe this is 2. Maybe this is 2. In any case, when you see a surprise bar, a relatively big bar, doing something that you were not expecting, it traps traders. For example, the bulls are now trapped into a lung that they think is no longer as good as it was. The bears are thinking, wow, we're pretty strong. If I'm not short, I have to get short. The result is, the bears will sell on little bounce and you get a second leg down. And the bulls who are disappointed by this big bear bar will look to exit. And they'll be selling as well. And the result is, you typically get a second leg after a surprise bar. This bar is not huge. The bull trend is still intact. Therefore, this is probably going to result in a minor trend reversal. The bulls are giving up. The bulls who bought this close, disappointed by the pair of dojis, they're giving up. And they'll wait for a couple legs before looking to buy again. This is kind of a surprise bar, where you have a bull trend and then a surprisingly big bear bar, but a minor reversal. I call it a give up bar. The bulls are giving up. On the other hand, this should have been a bull flag. We're getting a huge breakout below the bull flag. Consecutive bear bars with an exceptionally big bear bar. This is also a surprise. When you're getting a big bar like this, a big breakout like this, with an especially big bar, the odds are not only will you get at least a second leg down, but you'll probably get at least a measured move down. I typically look for a measured move based upon the open of the first bar of the breakout to the close of the second bar of the breakout. There are other measured moves as well. For example, based upon the height of the trading range, we're breaking below the range. But at a minimum, I look for a measured move based upon the height of the breakout, which we got. Here we have the biggest bear breakout, about 20 bars into a bear trend. Typically, that represents exhaustion and possibly an end of the trend. There's a gap between this close and that low. I think the gap will close. You're getting the biggest bear breakout late in a bear trend, probably exhaustion, and therefore the gap will probably close. In fact, there's a gap between this close and the low of this bull bar. That gap will probably close. Typically, when you get a reversal up from an exhaustion bar like this, or a pair of bars like this, an exhaustion breakout, the market tests the top of the sell climax. We have three consecutive bull bars closing near their highs, and they're pretty good sized bodies. That's a surprise. Traders were expecting maybe a trading range here, yet we have a surprisingly big reversal. And therefore, this is probably going to result in a measured move up, maybe from the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar. And we got up there. Maybe a measured move based upon the height of the sell climax. Remember, when you get a big breakout like that, the bears are hoping for a measured move down, like they got over here. If instead it goes above here, the market's probably going for a measured move up. This is the daily chart of the euro versus the dollar on the left. And this is a 60 minute chart of the US dollar versus the Canadian dollar on the right. Bear trend. We have a buy the close bull trend here, very strong. The bears have a micro double top. They have three consecutive bear bars. But it might simply be a breakout test, a test of this breakout point. And therefore, the market's still always in long. The bulls believe that instead of this being a trend reversal, it'll be a bull flag and the bull trend will resume. It's a surprise. After such a strong rally, traders were not expecting three consecutive bear bars, two of them closing near their lows. However, the bulls will assume that the surprise will fail and the bull trend will resume. Here's another surprise. Strong bull breakout and then huge outside down bar. Will this result in a bear trend? Probably not. The bears who are hoping that will probably be trapped. And the bulls will bet that this bear surprise will fail, just like they're betting that this bear surprise will fail. The bears who take this sell for any reason will put their stop just above the high of the sell climax. The bears who sold for any reason here, maybe they sold above this bar, maybe they sold this close, they're going to get out above the top of that bear bar as well. The bears are getting out. The bulls know that. The bulls know the bull trend is resuming. And therefore, bulls can buy on a stop just above the top of that surprise down or on the top of this surprise down. Higher probability, you buy the close down here or you buy the reversal up above a bull bar here. You buy above this bull bar here. In any case, it's a bear surprise that is low probability. The market's probably going to resume up and bulls will buy above the surprise. And this is true on any timeframe. This is a daily chart. You could be trading a one minute chart. It's the same thing. If you're in a bull trend and you get a bear surprise, bulls will buy atop of that bear surprise. Ones favor trend resumption. The trend is strong. So any reversal, even if it's strong like this or this, is probably minor. A bull flag and not the start of a bear trend. And therefore, bulls will buy once the bull trend starts to resume. Strong bear trend. And then you get this huge bull outside up bar. It's a surprise. But a very tight bear channel. Therefore, this is probably not the start of a bull trend. It's a minor reversal. But it's big. Therefore, probably there'll be at least a small second leg sideways to up, which there is. Bears will assume that this is too small of a pattern for a major reversal. And therefore, it's another minor reversal. Maybe we'll get a double top. Bears will look to sell. A bull surprise, but only a minor reversal. A bear surprise, bear surprise, minor reversal. The bears will sell below a strong bear bar. Here we have a double top. They'll sell below a strong bear bar. They know the bulls who are hoping for a bigger reversal up will exit below this bar. And therefore, the bears will sell below that bar as well. And you can see we got a breakout. Just like when the market went above the top of this three bar sell off, we got a breakout. Bulls and bears were buying. Here, bulls and bears are selling. The bulls are selling out of their longs and the bears are selling into their shorts. You can also look at a smaller timeframe for an earlier entry. You see a big bull bar closing on its high. Some bears will simply sell that close, especially if it's near a 20 bar exponential moving average. Others will put up a smaller timeframe chart and look for an earlier entry. Remember, this is a 60 minute chart. A trader might put up a five minute chart and look for a decent sell signal bar on the five minute chart after this surprise bar up on the 60 minute chart. If a trader sells during this bear breakout or at the close of this bear breakout, he's going to put his stop above the top of the bear breakout. If a bull buys during this reversal, maybe above the micro double bottom, maybe at the market, maybe closes, maybe above this bar. It doesn't matter where he buys. At this point, his stop is going to be down here below the bottom of the bull breakout. For example, let's say you sold that close. What's the chance that the market's going to fall for a measured move before it hits your stop? Typically 60%. If the breakout is especially big and the context is good, the probability can be as high as 70%. The same is true here for the bulls. If he buys that close, 60% chance it's going to go up for a measured move before it gets down to the stop. The bear can sell the close. He can sell just below the bear bar or he can sell a bear flag. We have a pullback from the breakout. He can sell below that bear bar. And the same is true for the bull. He can buy the close. He can buy just above the high of the bar. He can buy this attempt at a reversal down because he knows the odds are high. We're going up for at least a small second leg. Or you can buy above the top of this bull flag. We have a reversal up and a bull flag. This is a type of a cup and handle pattern. A cup and then a handle. A reversal and a pullback. The biggest bear breakout late in a bear trend. Certainly in the past 20 bars or so. Probably an exhaustion move. Exhaustion does not mean reversal into a bull trend. It means an end or a pause in the bear trend. The bears will wait 10 bars or so, a couple legs or so, to make sure the market is not reversing into a bull trend. If it's not, they'll sell again. Here they waited and it did reverse into a bull trend, so the bears did not sell. We have an exhaustive sell climax here that resulted in a bull trend. Remember, the bears who sold, a lot of them will put their stop above the top of the sell climax, maybe above the top of the bear leg. Their thought is, 60% chance we're going for a measured move down. Not in this case. This is probably an exhaustion move. However, the bears selling believe that as long as the market does not get above the top of the most recent sell climax, the trend down will continue. If it gets above the top of that sell climax, they conclude their premise is wrong. It's no longer in a bear trend. Once it gets above the top of this sell climax, it's then either in a bull trend or a trading range, in which case they don't want to be short. They want to be short if they think it's a bear trend, but once it gets above here, it's no longer a bear trend. The bulls know that as well, and therefore some bulls will buy above the top of that final sell climax, taking a chance that we go up for a measured move. That's especially true when you get a reversal up that looks as strong as this. Other bulls anticipate that this is an exhaustive end of the bear trend. Three pushes down, one, two, three, so it's a type of a wedge bottom. The biggest bear breakout late in a bear trend, probably an exhaustion move. And now we have a good bull bar and a second, even bigger good bull bar, so a micro double bottom. Some bulls, instead of waiting for the market to get above the top of the sell climax where the bears exit, they'll buy above the bull bar. And some bears, instead of waiting for their stop to be hit, they know at this point their stop is probably going to get hit, and therefore they'll exit above this bull bar. This is an E-mini chart, the markets in the trading range. And then we see an exceptionally big bull bar. This is an exceptionally big bull bar compared to what took place here. That's a surprise. Something like that does not happen very often. It's a low probability event. Whenever you have a low probability event, you have to assume that you're going to get some kind of follow through. Minimum objective, a measured move based upon the open of the bar to the close of the breakout. It's a one bar breakout. And here's a measured move up. And two legs up, one pull back two. At a minimum, this bar is probably going to be a measuring gap. We have a gap from the pull back to the breakout point. A measured move up based upon this trading range. We've already achieved it by the close of this bar. We're probably going to get a measured move up based upon the height of this bar. We also have a gap here. This low, that high, very little overlap. This might be a measuring gap as well. The market rallied to about a measured move up from that. Once you see that bar, a surprisingly big bar, breaking far above all the bars to the left, the market is always in long. And it's probably the start of a bull trend. This bar is exceptionally big. And a trader buying for any reason, buying at the market, buying the close of the bar, and buying the bull bar, has a stop at least down below the bottom of the bull breakout. Possibly the bottom of the bull trend. The stop is far below. And therefore, the risk is big. Many traders, instead of buying the breakout or the close, will look to buy a pullback. For example, a 50% pullback. The bottom of the bar, top of the bar, 50% pullback. Some traders will buy with the limit order here. Others will look for a reversal up and buy above a bull bar. And it would get filled here. We have a bull trend and we have a surprisingly big bear bar. It's a surprise bar. But the bear breakout failed. We have a pretty good bull reversal. We have a higher low. Bulls will buy above the high of this bar. And other bulls will buy above the top of that bear bar. Because theoretically, bears who sold at any point during this bar, for example, the close of this bar, will get out either above the high of the bar or above the high of the bear trend. If the bears are buying back their shorts here, a lot of bulls will buy exactly at that same price, expecting at least a profitable trade. A huge breakout like this has 60% to 70% chance of at least a measured move up. When the bar is especially big like this, the probability is closer to 70%. Whenever you have a very high probability trade, you always are going to have bad risk reward. You cannot have a high probability trade and great risk reward. There has to be a reason for some institution to take the other side of your trade. If you have high probability, he has great risk reward. That means you have bad risk reward. And you know that. Your stop is far away. So your risk is great. And if you're buying up here, a lot of the trend has already ended. The reward might not be all that great. It may simply be a measured move based upon the height of the body. And your stop is down here. And therefore you're looking for a reward equal to your risk. You need high probability to take that trade. Here's a Forex example. A 240 minute chart of the Euro versus the dollar. We have a 3 bar breakout. And it's a big breakout. Not much overlap between the bars. As soon as this bar closed, bulls bought. And the same here. Very little overlap. Very little pullback below the close of the bar. Strong breakout above a trading range. Probably we'll get at least two legs up. One, pull back two. Or one, one, pull back two. High probability that the market is going to go up for at least a measured move. Based upon the height of the breakout. 60% chance. It'll go up for a measured move. Based upon the open of the first bar. To the close of the final bar of the breakout. Is this part of the breakout? I don't know. It's a noticeably smaller bar. I would say the breakout ended here. And we began going sideways here. Minimum target. Measured move based upon the size of the breakout. The bulls achieved it there. Another minimum target. Is a measured move. Simply based upon the height of the trading range. And they got that right here. And you can see a lot of profit taking. Once it achieved that measured move target. The market's in a trading range. And had an unusually big pair of bear bars. Breaking below the trading range. The odds are 60%, maybe 70%, that there will be at least a second leg down. And a measured move down. The breakout already fell for a measured move based upon the height of the trading range. Next traders will look for a measured move based upon the height of the breakout. Either the open of this bar to the close of that bar. We've already achieved that. Or the open of the first of the two big bear bodies. Here. To the close of that bar. The market achieved its measured move objective here. And then we get a surprisingly big bull bar here. And another pair of surprisingly big bull bars here. The bears are giving up. And this reversal. We're down. We're up. We're up a second time. It's probably going to lead to at least two legs up. This is the E-mini. Whenever you have a strong breakout on the open in the first hour or so, there's a 50% chance it's going to reverse. And this is an example of it. Strong enough breakout, the odds were, there would be at least a second leg down. But you can see the market reversed after the second leg down. Here's a Forex example. We have a trading range. And a very strong bear breakout below the range. 60% chance of at least some kind of a measured move down. Maybe from the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar here or here. Or simply a measured move down based upon the height of the trading range. And you can see there was some buying at a measured move down. Also, a strong breakout like this, the odds are we're going to get a swing down and at least two legs down. One, pull back and then two. Or one, pull back and then trading range and then two. Different computers will look at it differently. When you have a second leg and it's especially strong, but you look to the left and you're still in a trading range or in a channel, it might be a trap. Therefore, instead of leading to a trend, it can lead to a reversal. Also, if you have an especially strong breakout late in a trend, it's more likely to be an exhaustive end of the trend than the start of an even stronger leg in the trend. This is a Forex chart. It's the 60 minute chart of the Euro versus the dollar. And the market's in a trading range. We have a bear breakout and we reversed up a little bit here and then we reversed up very strongly here. But look to the left. This is a surprise bar or a surprise pair of bars, a very surprisingly strong reversal. But look to the left. We did not break strongly above the top of the trading range. We're still in the trading range. And therefore, if you have bad follow through, for example, a bear bar closing near its low, this might, instead of being the start of a bull trend, it might be a second leg trap. Two legs up, one pull back, two. Testing the top of the trading range. And it was. Strong bull breakout. Look to the left. We're still either in a bear channel, low or high, or in a trading range. And whenever you see a strong second leg, but you're still in a bear channel or in a trading range, and then you have terrible follow through, a bear bar like that, bulls will get out below the low of that bear bar, and aggressive bears will sell. Other bears will wait for three consecutive decent bear bars and then sell closes. The bull breakout failed, and the trading range continued. This bull breakout, we have a gap at this point between this low and these highs and this high. Probably an exhaustion gap. Once it starts to turn down, at this point, it's probably an exhaustion gap. At this point, the gap is between this low and these highs. Also this low and this high. And the odds are it's going to close or get close to closing. Here, in fact, it did close. The bulls tried to get a higher low here, a bull flag after this bull breakout. Instead, we got a second leg down. Whenever you see a second leg down, look to the left. We're breaking below the trading range, but will the breakout succeed or will it become a bigger trading range? And that breakout then is a second leg trap. In this particular case, we reversed up. We have a bull bar here. Bears gave up. They bought back above this bull bar. It's a small triangle. Aggressive bulls bought or they waited for a breakout here, or they bought as the bar was forming. Bulls get out below that bear bar because just like we had a second leg trap down, they're concerned this bear bar might represent a second trap up, a bull trap, which it did. Here we have possibly, well, churned into a trading range, but here we have a rally, but it's a wedge rally. One, pullback two, pullback three, with a lot of prominent bear bars. And it's coming in a bear trend. It's a bear flag. It's more likely that we'll get a bear breakout and a resumption of the bear trend than it is that we'll get a bull breakout. However, if you have enough strong bulls confident that they can drive the market back up to the high, you will get a bull breakout above a bear flag, which is what happened. The bulls, they're hoping for a bull trend, but if the rally starts to stall, the bulls will just scalp out. Who's causing this breakout? In part, it's the bulls trying to get up to the high of the day. And in part, it's the bears. They have a wedge bear flag and we're getting an upside breakout. So the bears are buying back their shorts in a panic. Why did the rally end right here? Well, because the bears who panicked out are gone. So there are no more bears buying. And the bulls who bought, a lot of them were strong bulls just hoping for a scalp. They're going to be taking profits. So there's nobody left to buy. The bears who panicked out, they're gone. No more bears left to buy. And the bulls, they're willing to buy if we keep going up strongly. But if we start to stall, which we did, the bulls will stop buying as well. The bar is shrinking, body getting smaller, smaller, smaller. Bulls start to take profits. The strong bulls knew it was a bull trap. And they don't care. They bought, they made their profit. Whenever I see a strong breakout like that, especially a bull breakout above a bear flag, I always look to the left. If we're not above everything to the left, it could be simply a second leg bull trap. The first leg up is the wedge, and then the breakout is the second leg. When you have a pair of consecutive decent bull bars, usually you'll get at least a small second leg sideways to up. But sometimes it's only a small bar like that. The bulls saw disappointing bars. They took profits. Eventually, the remaining bulls, the weak bulls who bought up here hoping for a bull trend, they gave up over here. So it's the opposite of the bears giving up here. The bulls gave up here. The 240 minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. And we have a surprisingly big bear bar. But, look to the left. We broke below this low, but we did not break below the trading range. The bears need good follow-through. Otherwise, this is probably a bear trap. Trapping bears into selling the bottom of the range hoping for a bear trend. Instead, it's simply a sell vacuum test of the bottom of the range. Just like this was a buy vacuum test of the top of the range, this might be a sell vacuum test of the bottom of the range. Always look to the left. If the breakout did not break below all the bars to the left, it might be a trap. And if you start getting bull bars here or here, bears will give up, buy back their shorts above the bull bars, and bulls will buy, betting that the trading range will continue and that this will be an exhaustive move. You can see the market went above the top of that sell climax bar and it ran the stops for the bears who put their stops just above that bar. Big bear break a terrible follow-through, especially this bull bar closing on its high. Bears will buy back their shorts above that bar or above this bull bar get filled here. Two legs down, we tried to get a bull flag. We got a bear break up below the bear flag. Strong enough break out, probably at least a small second leg down, but still possibly a bear trap. It became an exhaustion gap. At the close of this bar, there was a gap between its close and the breakout point and its close and the low of the prior bar. Both gaps closed on the reversal up and this became an exhaustion gap bar and a failed bear breakout. We have a bull trend, a trading range, and then a very strong bear breakout, consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows. But always look to the left. If you're not below everything to the left, it's possible that this is just a bear trap, a very strong breakout that fails. So instead of leading to a bear trend, it reverses. The result was this low stayed above this low and it was a higher low. The market was in a bull channel, a broad bull channel. We have a higher low, we have a higher high. So this was a bear leg in what turned out to be a bull channel. The bulls had a strong rally and a pullback. They were hoping this was a bull flag. And we tried to get a bull breakout. It reversed down and we got a bear breakout after the bull breakout. When you see the consecutive big bear bars, the odds are you're going to get at least a small second leg down. Odds are does not mean 90%. Odds are means 60%. That means 40% chance you will not. Turned out this was a trap. The bears who sold down here were unable to get all through selling. The bulls saw it as a higher low and an opportunity to buy at a great price. So the strong bears who created the bear breakout took their profits. They scalped out. Once the weak bulls gave up, sold out of their lungs, there was nobody left to sell. The strong bears sold up here and the weak bulls sold on the way down. And then there was nobody left to sell. The bulls sensed that. They bought. Strong bears sensed that and they bought back their shorts for a scalp. And the result was a bull reversal. A second leg trap. First leg down, a bull flag. And the second leg down, a strong bear breakout. The bears were hoping for a bear trend. But they decided to scalp and the bulls saw this as an opportunity to buy at a great price. And they got a higher low and what became a bull channel. Look at this breakout. It's the biggest bull bar and maybe 30 bars into the bull trend. Whenever you have the biggest breakout late in a bull trend, 20 or more bars into the trend, it's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend than it is the start of an even stronger trend. Sometimes you get a second leg up. But usually the trend has to pause. Most exhaustions do not lead to opposite trends. They simply lead to an end of the current trend. In other words, a pullback. It can become a trading range or simply a couple legs down, maybe to the bottom of the bull breakout. And then the bull trend might resume. We did get one more leg up. But this is probably an exhaustive end of the trend. Consecutive bi-climaxes. Bi-climax and then a small bi-climax. We're probably going to pull back for 10 bars and two legs. Possibly reverse into a bear trend. This is a 240 minute chart of the Euro versus the dollar. And here we have the biggest bull bar in the entire bull trend. And it's the third leg up. One, pull back two, pull back three. There's been a series of bi-climaxes here. Here. Here. Here. Here. Here. Here. Every bull bar, every series of bull bars is a bi-climax. And when you have a series of bi-climaxes, the market usually gets exhausted and it will start going sideways. When you see the biggest bull bar occurring late in the trend, it probably represents an exhaustion move. There's sometimes a second leg up as there is here. But the odds are we're going to get at least a couple legs sideways to down. One pull back two. Here. We also got one pull back two. The market tries to get down to the bottom of the most recent bi-climax this low. Ultimately, it got a little bit below it here. The market is selling off strongly for about 60 or 70 bars. And now we have the biggest bear bar occurring 60 bars into the bear trend. Is it more likely the start of an even stronger swing down or more likely an exhaustive end of the trend? At the close of this bar, there's a gap between its close and the breakout point here, the breakout point here, and the prior bar. Whenever you see the biggest bar in a bear trend occurring late in the trend, it's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend. The gap will probably close. All of the gaps closed. We went above the breakout point here, above this breakout point, above the low of the prior bar, and above the top of the final cell climax bar. And therefore, it was an exhaustive end of the trend instead of a measuring gap leading to an even stronger leg down. This is the EUR vs. $120 chart. We have the biggest pair of bear bars occurring late in a bear trend. Certainly more than 20 bars into the trend. In fact, probably the strongest bear breakout in the entire trend, 60 or 70 bars. It's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend, meaning the market might go sideways or up. Less likely it's a measuring gap and the shard of an even stronger leg down. It's a strong enough breakout so you often get a second leg down, but you have to be looking for reversals. We have a bull bar here. This might have been the end of it. The bear's got a couple more bear bars and a second leg down and a reversal up. The market went to the top in the most recent cell climax. It even got to the top of that very strong exhaustive cell climax. Whenever you have a very strong breakout, here we have two bars in the breakout, you often get one more leg down before the reversal occurs. Sometimes in a bull trend, the bulls give up and you get a minor reversal. And in a bear trend, sometimes the bears give up and you get a couple legs up. Market's in a bear trend. We have a pair of pretty good bull bars here. Very tight bear channel. Probably a minor reversal and a couple legs up. The second leg up is also pretty strong so maybe we'll get more sideways. We have another strong bull bar. Maybe we've got a couple legs up. One pull back two. These are minor reversals. Very tight bear channel. The market's going sideways and therefore we might get a major trend reversal. This might be a higher low major trend reversal. Or you could say this very strong bull breakout led to a higher low major trend reversal here. Some computers will say this is the higher low major trend reversal. Others will say this is a higher low major trend reversal. Many computers will say that this is still a minor reversal because we did not clearly have a major reversal here. And those computers will say minor reversal. Strong enough to get a major reversal after the bear trend resumes, which it did here. And we got a higher low major reversal into a bull trend. E-mini example. Bear trend. Now we have a surprisingly big bull bar. An outside up bar. Therefore you expect at least a second leg up. And a pause in the bear trend. Second leg up. One pull back two. Or maybe this bull channel up to this point is tight enough so it's the first in an even bigger, more complex, two-legged correction. One pull back two. Or one trading range two. This is something interesting. We're in a bear trend and we have a very big bear bar. A surprisingly big bear bar. The bears are trying to resume the trend. A lot of the bears who sold, for example, if they sold this close, will use a tight stop above the high of this bar thinking that if it's a bear trend, it should not go above the high of this breakout bar. And the bulls know that. Some bulls will buy above the high of that bar looking for two legs up. Other bulls will, instead of buying with a stop above the bear bar, will wait to see the strong close of this bull bar and then buy a pullback. This is a small cup and handle pattern. We have a reversal and then a bull flag. That is what a cup and handle pattern is. If you're looking at a smaller timeframe chart, for example, a one minute chart, the entire pattern would be, I don't know, 20 bars long. And it would look like a more traditional cup and handle. A reversal up and a pullback. It's a buy signal for a second leg up. This is a daily chart of the Euro versus the Japanese Yen. Very tight bull channel, but we have a surprisingly big bear bar. Minor reversal likely, which means a couple legs sideways to down. One pullback, two or two. The bull trend resumed and we have another surprisingly big bear bar. Traders were not expecting either of these bear bars and therefore they are surprises. This is clearly not likely to be a major trend reversal after a very tight bear channel. So it's a minor reversal. This you might be able to get a major reversal out of it. Maybe it's a higher high major trend reversal, bull trend, and then break below the bull trend line and then a resumption up. But this channel is tight enough so that it's probably a minor reversal. Two legs sideways to down. One pullback, two. Big up, big down, big confusion usually has to go sideways. Big up, big down, big confusion usually has to go sideways. These are give up bars. The bulls are giving up, but when they see the bear is unable to create a bear trend, the bulls will look to buy again. In an example, a bull trend. It's a bull leg in a trading range, but a bull trend. And then we have a surprisingly big bear bar. The bull channel is tight. This is probably a minor reversal, which means a trading range. We have two legs down, one pullback, two or one pullback, two. And at this point, we have a lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout, lower high. And we did get a swing down. Big trend bars are common. And most of them do not give much indication about what will follow. Every now and then, you'll get a bar that doesn't seem likely. And therefore, you're surprised. It's a low probability event. They usually lead to second legs. However, if a surprise bar already is a second leg, and it's in a trading range or a channel, it could be a trap. Trapping traders into selling too low. Or trapping traders into buying too high. Sometimes you get an especially strong trend bar late in a trend. When you do, it's more likely an exhaustive move than it is the start of an even stronger leg in the trend. Strong trends often have reasonably strong trend bars that go against the trend. Usually the bulls are giving up in a bull trend. Or if it's in a bear trend and you get a big bull bar, the bears are giving up temporarily and you get a minor reversal. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the eighth of eight videos on breakouts.