 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on swing trading examples. In this video, I'm going to be talking about day trading examples and I'm going to emphasize trade management more in this particular video. We see a bull micro channel. 16 bars without a pullback. By pullback, I mean the low of the bar going below the low of the prior bar. And this began here. On a higher timeframe chart, that's a very strong breakout. However, it's unsustainable. Can you get 20 bars, 30 bars without a pullback? Very unlikely. It's climactic and climactic usually means the market has to go sideways or down for 10 or 20 bars before the bulls will buy again. If you're buying anywhere in here for any reason, you can buy above a high one. You have another high one by here, or you can start buying closes all the way up. Any buy that you take anywhere through here, you have a stop down here. And you do not raise your stop. Maybe after four or five bars here, you might raise your stop to here. The market is clearly still always in long. If you're swing trading, there's no reason to exit your long. Whether or not you bought here or here, you're still holding long. And even here, we have a potential final flag and a transition into a trading range. No time in here do the bears do anything to convince traders that they have taken control. And therefore, the bulls are still holding long. We have a 20 gap bar pullback here. We've been above the moving average for 20 or 30 bars. Chances are the bulls will continue to hold long. Even up here, the bears do not have a convincing top. The market has transitioned into a trading range and it's okay for the bulls to exit and then wait for another buy. However, they do not have to. No matter where they bought, let's say they bought here, they're still long. The market is still always in long and it's still reasonable to stay long until the end of the session. If you did exit and you're flat or if you were simply flat for any reason, the market now is pulling back to the moving average for the first time in about 30 or 40 bars. It's reasonable to buy a reversal up, especially over a bull bar, for at least a scalp up. You can call it a wedge bull flag as well. One push down, pull back. Second push down, pull back. And then another bear bar, third push down. And now the bulls are trying to reverse up. Since the market's now in a trading range, traders want to buy low, sell high. And when they sell high, they can be selling out of longs for a scalp, taking profits. Not a strong enough setup for the bears to sell. But it's reasonable for bulls to exit longs, whether they bought here or whether they bought here or anywhere in here. Although you don't see all of yesterday, we broke below yesterday's low and we are reversing up. A good looking buy signal bar and three consecutive bull bars. The market's always in long. Good looking entry bar for the bulls who bought above this bar. Big bar closing on its high. Bigger than the bear bar before it. Big mal сид 모er was realtors for last year Was a regular trade will go� kала k mús因為 Consecutive strong, bull bars, by strong I mean closing on their highs. Failed break out below yesterday's low. The market is now always in long. And by that what I mean is the market's probably going at least a little bit higher. least a little bit higher. The follow-through bar after this strong bull bar, a little bit disappointing, the body is not particularly big and it has a fairly conspicuous tail on top. That is a warning that this rally might in fact be a bull leg in what will become a trading range. Maybe we'll get one more push up to the moving average and form a wedge opening reversal. Reversal down, reversal down, maybe a third reversal down at the moving average. It's reasonable to buy this bull bar closing on its high. You buy on a stop above its high and you get filled right here. Bulls buy on a stop above the high of this bull bar and they get filled here. This is then the entry bar. Most bulls should be entering on a stop above the high of the buy signal bar. Aggressive bulls would buy the close. I think most traders should enter on a stop above its high. The context is good for at least a minor reversal, in other words a few bars up and possibly a trading range, but it might be the low of the day. As the bar is forming, it's going up reasonably strongly. A lot of bulls who did not buy the close here or the high of that bar right here will buy as the bar is forming, betting that the momentum up will result in higher prices. When you're taking these early buys, your stop is right below the low of the bar. So your risk is small, but your probability is low as well. However, after you've had two or three good bull bars, the probability is higher that the market will go higher. If you buy at this point, your stop is now further away. And that's always the case. If you wait until the probability is higher, the stop is further away, so the risk is greater. That is acceptable, just as it is acceptable to take the early entry above the high of this bull reversal bar. Get long right here. By having a second consecutive bull bar closing on its high, and now a third consecutive bull bar closing on its high, the bulls have demonstrated that they're in control. The probability is the first reversal down will be bought. The bulls will buy it, and not many bears will sell it, and will go at least a little bit higher. Bulls buying closes, they buy this close, they'll buy that close as well, betting that there'll be at least a 60% chance of some kind of a measured move up based upon the height of the breakout. Maybe the open of this bar, the close of this bar, or the close of that bar. More aggressive bulls will even buy with limit orders below the low of this bar, betting that it's a bad sell. For the bears, a double top, this high, that high. But three consecutive bull bars, a reversal up from below yesterday's low. Three bars closing above their midpoints, two closing on their highs. This is a low probability short. The bulls know that, and bulls who did not buy earlier will buy with a limit order at the low of that bar, and they'll get filled right here. The smaller bar, this tail, and the bear body, means that the momentum is waning. The momentum for the bulls is less, and that increases the chances that, instead of a bull trend, this might be a bull leg, and what becomes a trading range. There's room to the moving average, which is a magnet, and also room to a measure move target from this open to that close. That takes us up around here. We're probably going higher, but not necessarily a lot higher. It does not matter if you bought the close of this bar above its high here, this close, that close, this low. The stop is right here. You're holding long for at least a little bit more up. The bulls who bought are betting on at least a bull leg in a trading range, and possibly a bull trend. They know the odds are that we'll get at least one more leg up, and not a bear trend at this point. It can become a bear trend, but it's not likely. Stop down here. The market's always in long, so the bulls will hold long and rely on their stop. If it gets closer to the moving average, the bulls will be thinking that we might get an opening reversal down from the moving average, maybe a wedge rally, one, two, and three. But right now, they believe we're going at least a little bit higher. Other bulls will look at this and say, okay, suppose we sell off. We're trying to reverse up strongly here. There probably will be more buyers below this low than sellers. Those bulls are trading small and buying for any reason, and they'll buy more at the low of this bar, betting that there'll be more buyers than sellers here. You'll have a lot of bulls getting stopped out here, but you'll have stronger bulls buying at that low, betting against a bear trend, betting that there's enough buying here, so that any reversal down will not get very far before we test back up. Those bulls who are looking to buy at this low will use a wide stop, maybe based upon a measured move down from the height of this opening range, maybe even further. The bulls who bought for any reason here or here or here now have a new low. Most traders who bought for any reason would stop themselves out below the low of the buy signal bar. Aggressive bulls would, in fact, buy more. They'll see a bear bar here, bad follow through for the bears. A bear bar here, not a particularly big bear bar. They think that the sell-off is probably a bear leg in what will become a trading range. A lot of the bulls who bought would exit on the double top. This high, that high, a low two, low one, low two, but the bulls who did not exit would exit either below this bar or using some kind of a wide stop here or lower. We sold off. We rallied. We rallied. We rallied. We sold off. Multiple reversals, probably a trading range. Again, some bulls would exit on the low two triggering in a bear trend. We're below the moving average. Not a very good sell signal bar. More likely, we're going to go sideways. We have small bars, multiple reversals. It looks like the development of an early trading range. Some bulls would exit on the close of this bar or on the close of that bar, if not below that low. But if they do exit, they'll look to buy a reversal up, betting that it's a trading range and not a bear trend. Again, you can exit on a stop below the low of that bar, the low of the original signal bar, or on the close of the follow through bar. We have a small bear close after the breakout to a new low. Now, I mentioned that some bulls will look at this and say it's probably a trading range. It goes to a new high and it gets sold off. It goes to a new low. It's probably going to rally. There are bulls, especially expert bulls, who will buy with a limit order at the low of this bar, arguing we got a bear reversal, but bad follow through. We have a bear reversal and then only a small bear bar here. Probably we're not going down much more. This is probably a bear leg in what will become a trading range. In a trading range, bears look to sell at prior highs. They sell here. And bulls look to buy at prior lows. They buy here. And they buy more lower, betting that this is a bear leg in what will become a trading range rather than the start of a bear trend. You can call this a double top. You can call this a double top. We have a low two, low one, low two. The bears are hoping that this double top is the high of the day, but look at the sell signal bar. It's a bull body and we have three consecutive bull bars. That is a low probability sell. You have a low two short, low one, low two, but a doji bar and a five bar tight trading range. Again, a low probability short. And therefore it increases the chances that any sell off will become a bear leg in a trading range. Bulls will be buying below the prior lows and they'll be buying reversals up. The bears who sell either below here for a low two, low one, low two, double top or here, double top here, know that we have three consecutive bull bars and we're not at important resistance, the moving average. This is a lower probability short. They'll sell hoping that it's an opening reversal down from resistance, the moving average, but they know the probability is low. The bears who take this short, some will put a stop right above the high of this signal bar. Three consecutive bull bars, I would not. I think you need a wider stop. You could put a stop way up here above the high of this rally or you can put a stop slightly above a measured move up from the opening range. This low, that high, measured move up and then stop just a little bit above. The bulls have a reasonable argument, probably a trading range. The bears have a reasonable argument, opening reversal, and then a double top bear flag, double top bear flag, possible high of the day. Whenever both the bulls and the bears have reasonable setups, the market is probably going to go sideways. Good reversal up, bad follow through. We sold off to a new low, but terrible follow through here, and really not very good follow through here. Therefore, this is probably a trading range. The bears will sell the low two short, low one, and then low two. They'll sell the strong bear close. They'll sell the breakout below the low of the day. They'll sell the follow through bar after the breakout. That is a disappointing breakout bar. It did not close at a new low, and it has a fairly prominent tail and a small body. This is a disappointing follow through bar. It's a small bear doji. The bears who are selling are concerned that this is not very bearish, and it might be a trading range instead of the start of a bear trend. A lot of bears, instead of taking these shorts, which are low probability, will wait for a strong bear breakout and then sell. After that strong bear breakout, the probability would then be higher that we're in a bear trend. The bears who are shorting for any reason, once we have a breakout to a new low, and a pretty good bear bar and follow through bar, this is a major lower high. They'll put their stop above that high. A bad sell signal bar for the bears is only a doji, and bad follow through after a reasonably good bear bar. The bears know this is more likely a trading range than a bear trend, but the math is okay to swing a short. They take any of these shorts, stop up here, and they hold short looking for a swing down. If the bulls get a reversal up, the bears will get out before the market reaches their stop. The bulls have a rally on the open, and they have a high one buy when the market went above this high, and they're hoping for a high two buy. Even though this low is below the bull breakout, it still could be a deep pullback from this initial rally. Sometimes you'll have a sell-off after a breakout, and the sell-off goes below the bottom of the rally, but it's still a pullback from that breakout. So sometimes the pullback goes below the bottom of the initial rally. Therefore, bulls will be looking to buy a reversal up, either as a pullback from this rally, in other words, bull breakout, bull flag, or as a low in a trading range. The bears know they do not have good sell signal bars here or here, and the bear entry bar is not particularly big, and the follow-through bars are weak. They are concerned that this looks more like a trading range than a bear trend. They will therefore be quick to exit if it starts to reverse up. And that's what it did. We have an outside up bar closing on its high, and the bar after it has a bull body. This, in fact, a lot of traders will see as a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down. One, pullback. Two, and then pullback. And then three, and then a reversal up. You can call it a wedge lower low. You can call it a double bottom or slightly lower low. In any case, once we're up here and right here, we're probably always in long, and we're probably going higher. The reason this bar looks like this is because the bears who did sell down here are giving up. They did not want the market to go up, especially after bad sell signal bars and bad follow-through. Again, you can call it a double bottom or a slightly lower low double bottom. And you can call it a wedge three pushes down. In any case, it's a buy setup, and the bulls have a strong bull reversal. When the bulls see this outside up reversal from the wedge bottom and the lower low reversal, they'll buy closes. They'll buy this close. And then once we have one more bull close, they'll start buying closes here. That close. This close. They'll buy a breakout above the top of the bear sell-off, the final bear sell-off, betting that the bears will give up. The bears who were short and did not exit earlier will get out above the high of the spare bar. The bears are exiting and the bulls are buying, betting that we're always in long and will go higher, maybe up to yesterday's close. The bears are in long and will go higher. Not good follow-through after the strong bull reversal, but the next bar has good follow-through closing on its high. So the odds still favor higher prices, even though we're simply pulling back to the moving average. We gaff down and we're sideways to the moving average. Here we have four consecutive bull bars, two closes at a new high of the day, two closes above the moving average, and two decent sized bull bars closing on their highs. The market's always in long, probably by the close of this bar. It's easier, therefore, to make money looking to buy. The stop for any of these buys is below the bottom of this bull reversal. Minimum target, you're looking for a measured move up based upon the height of the trading range. Initially, I used the smallest dimensions of the range, this low, that high. If it goes above that line, then I'll look at a measured move from this low to that high, which would be a little bit higher. This bar represents the bears giving up and the bulls getting confident. If you want, you can call it a lower low major trend reversal. We have a bear trend, a bull breakout, and then a lower low. You can also say it's a minor reversal. We only have three bars up and a gap down. Not a very big pattern, and therefore it might be minor. In any case, it's still always in long, and the odds are we're going higher. Again, even though we settled off to a new low of the day, a lot of traders will look at this sell-off as simply a bull flag, a pullback from this rally, even though it's at a new low. This is probably going to remain the low for the next several hours, and possibly the low of the day. We have a gap down, we reversed up, and we're trying to reverse up a second time from below yesterday's low. This is a reasonably good buy setup. If you break below yesterday's low, we gap down, and you try to reverse up twice. Usually the market will try to get a swing up. And you can see we continued up further, and what happened once we reached the measured move target? We pulled back. Why did we pull back? Because a lot of the bulls who bought for any reason are taking profits around the measured move up from the initial trading range. Aggressive bears might take that short and scale in higher, but when the reversal up is as strong as this is, most of the selling is simply profit taking from the bulls. Most bears will not sell, because we're probably only going to pull back for a bar or two, and probably not far enough to make a profit if you're selling. Again, buying for any reason, stop is below the bottom. This early trading range trading down and up and down and up and down and up increases the chances that we'll have additional trading range trading later in the day. Also, we have a bull bar and a doji, a bull bar not all that big, and three small bars, a bull bar and bear bar. Bad follow-through on the way up. Even though we're clearly always in long, that bad follow-through after every good bull bar, and this early trading range trading, increases the chances that this will soon evolve into a trading range. So, we're going to have a bull bar. We're going to have a bull bar. Possibly a parabolic wedge. We have a breakout and a pause, a breakout and a bear bar. Not really good shape, but it's possibly a parabolic wedge top. It's also possible that it's a second leg trap in a trading range day. First leg up, pause, second leg up. It's okay to exit longs below this bear bar, just in case it's a parabolic wedge and we sell off for the rest of the day. It's okay to stay long, but if you do, the stop is all the way down here, not simply below the low of this bull bar. It's an expanding triangle. We sold off, we sold off from a higher high, and sold off from a higher high. But a very tight bull channel, that is a low probability short below the low of that bear bar. More likely the bulls will get at least a small leg up. Therefore, probably buyers below the low of this bear bar and at least a little bit more up. However, we have early trading range trading and bad follow through after every bull bar. This might end up being a bull leg in the trading range. And if it is, we can get a very deep pullback and still be in a trading range and not a bear trend. Because of the weak follow through after the bull bars and the early trading range trading, a lot of bulls will exit below the low of this bear bar for a failed breakout. Other bulls will hold, stop down here, bottom of the bull trend, and look to add on lower. They believe that if we sell off, the worst that will happen is we'll get a bear leg in a trading range. And therefore, if they hold long, let's say they bought this close and they hold long, they can buy more lower, confident that the odds are, will get back up here before we fall below here. So they rely on their stop. Bear scalpers, they might sell below the low of this bear bar, arguing on a parabolic wedge, three pushes up one, two, three, and a failed breakout above the top of the trading range, and a lower high compared to yesterday's high. It's really not a very good looking sell, but it's a reasonable sell, especially if you can use a wide stop, maybe a measured move up, and sell more higher. I said not a high probability short. We have a lot of bull bars and a very tight channel. Higher probability to wait to sell after we see three or four bear bars, or after we see a new high and a reversal down. I said not a high point. Look what happened here. Strong bull trend. Bulls bought the close, disappointed by these three bars, especially the two bear bars. And then look what happened when this bar got near that close. The buy the close bulls who bought here were disappointed by these two bear bars, and they immediately placed limit orders to get out at the original entry at this close, maybe a little bit below. And when the market got to their sell orders, remember they're long, they're looking to exit, it's sold off. These two consecutive bear bars have reversed this bull breakout, and now we have big up, big down, big confusion, trading range likely. It's possible that this is the high of the day, and that we just trade down for the rest of the day. More likely we'll form some kind of a higher low and try to get back up here later in the day. We're probably always in short. The bulls who bought this close gave up on this bar, and now we have consecutive bear bars closing on or near their lows. We're probably going at least a little bit lower. Some of the bulls who bought for any reason, and the bulls who are flat, are looking to buy. And some of them will place a limit order to buy a 50% pullback from this low to that high. They'll look to buy with a limit order somewhere in here. Other bulls, let's say you buy this close, are looking to buy above a bull bar, maybe above this bull bar, maybe above this bull reversal bar. Potential small final flag and wedge. Down, up, down, up, and then down, up. Very tight bear channel, and therefore the reversal up will probably be minor and will probably end up in a trading range. Big up, big down, big confusion, probably sideways. Big up, big down, big down, big down, big down, big down, big down, big down, big down, big down, big down. We got a little bit more down, and then we entered a tight training range. For the bears, we're selling off, and now we have a small double top. We're selling off. It's a sell-off, a bear trend. Always in short, maybe by this close. Therefore, this is a double top bear flag. You can also call it a wedge. Three pushes up, one, pull back two, pull back three. Does not look like a wedge, but the computers see it as a type of wedge. Bears know we're probably always in short. And therefore they'll look at any rally as a bear flag, and they'll look to sell a reversal down. They might sell below the low of this bar for a double top bear flag. A bear body, not particularly strong bear body, but still a bear body. We have a good rally and a buy the close rally. Even though the bulls could have gotten out here, around break even, maybe a small loss. Usually when you have a sell-off that does not look particularly strong, it'll be followed by a test back up. And this will end up as a training range. Big up, big down, big confusion, training range. Training ranges go up, they go down, and they go back up. The bears have a breakout and follow through, but this looks like a 20 bar tight training range. Not particularly bearish, and therefore bulls will be looking to buy a reversal up. Is it a wedge? Three legs down, one, pull back two, pull back three. It's not really, but it's still three attempts to sell off, and each attempt has failed. And here we have a bear bar, and a follow through bear bar, and then a bull bar. This looks like a bear trap, trapping bears into selling below the bottom of this training range. Betting that we'll get down to a new low of the day. And the bulls bought that bear close, betting that the bears would not get another bear bar. In other words, bad follow through, and they'll look to buy the reversal up. If you buy for any reason, here or here below the low of this bar, this close, your stop is still below the low of the bull reversal until the market breaks below it, or until it becomes clearly strongly bearish. We became a little bit always in short here, but probably this is going to result in a small sell off and a higher low. The bars are not all that big compared to the bull bars. And even though we have a bear breakout, and we'll probably get some kind of a measure move down, we're probably not going to get below the low of this bar. The market after the sell off is probably in a trading range. The bulls have bought for any reason, know it's in a trading range, and they'll therefore look for rallies that reverse down, and they'll get up. Some bulls have bought this close, very disappointed by this, but they held long, stopped down here. And they'll look to buy more above a bull bar, maybe this, maybe that. Let's say they buy above this bull bar right here. This is their average entry price. They bought here, they bought more here, and this is the midpoint of those two prices. A lot of the bulls who did take that buy are disappointed by how much selling that we've had. They're looking to simply get out break even, and they'll get out with a limit order right here at the midpoint of their two entry prices. Other bulls would have bought above this bar, and their midpoint would be a little bit higher. In this video, I gave some day trading examples, and I tried to be more specific about how to manage trades. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on swing trading examples.