 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on entering late in trends. I'll begin by talking about the final trend bar. Every trend up or down. When you look back at it after reversal, you can find the final trend bar. And that's important because institutions trade using line charts and not bar charts. And then the high close in a bull trend and the low close in a bear trend become important. At some point when a trend reverses, there is a bar or a series of bars that indicate that the trend traders are giving up and that traders in the opposite direction are taking control. I refer to these as give up bars. And finally, I'm going to be talking a little bit about strong bear breakouts. We have a bull trend. And at some point after it reverses, you look back and say, that was the final strong bull trend bar. There was one more small bull bar with a slightly higher close, but this was the final time when bulls were actually clearly in control. Again, after this reverses, this is the final bull trend bar or that leg up. Again, a brief final bull trend bar. The bulls owned the market for only one bar. This was potentially the final bull trend bar, but the bulls got another leg up. And then this became the final bull bar. Here, possibly the final bull trend bar. Strong enough rally probably will go at least a little bit higher. Again, a potential final bull trend bar. We went a little bit higher and we may go higher still. If you're trading this, you might be buying for a variety of reasons. And one might be you'll buy the close. Every time you see a bull bar, you buy the close, betting that the market will go at least a little bit higher, knowing that eventually it will not. Eventually, there'll be a final bull trend bar that will be the high close of the rally. And the market will then go the other way. What do you do if you buy that high close and then you see this bear bar immediately afterwards, especially since you might be at the top of a trading range? Bear bars, any one of them could be the final bear trend bar. In hindsight, after you get a strong reversal, you know that this was the final bear trend bar. And the same with that. And after this reversal, we had many possible candidates for the final bear trend bar. But this turned out to be the final bear trend bar of this bear trend. It's in a bear trend, so traders are selling for any reason. And one common way to trade is if there's a strong bear trend bar, you sell the close. Believing that the odds are a strong bear trend bar likely means we're going to get lower prices. Everyone knows that one of the bars will not have lower prices. And in fact, it'll be the final bear trend bar. And then we'll get a reversal. Had you sold this bear bar, what are you thinking after you see this bull bar? You're thinking that maybe I sold the final bear trend bar and the market is about to reverse. A bull trend bar, not especially big, so not especially strong. But buy the close bulls will still buy, hoping that the trend continues higher, knowing that it might not. When the channel up is this tight, the first reversal down probably will be minor. And the best the bears will get is a pullback into a bull flag. If the bulls buy here, they know they probably will be able to get out break even because the first reversal is minor. And the bull trend will probably resume enough for these bulls to get out break even or with a small profit or a small loss. What's happening here? We've got a bear bar after that final bull bar and the bulls are no longer aggressively buying. So had you bought that final bull closed right here and then you see this bear bar, you probably are disappointed and you probably have to be rethinking your plan. You're looking to the left. Maybe we're at the top of a developing trading range. Maybe we have a double top neckline. Maybe we'll break to a measured move down. However, when the channel up is this tight, usually the first reversal down is minor. The bears see what's going on as well. When they see the close of that bear bar, they're thinking, oh, maybe we're winning. Every time a bull buys, there has to be a bear that sells. And at this point, the bears are pretty hopeful that they may have stopped the bull trend. What took place here? Well, I call this a give up bar. The bulls are giving up. And if they did not give up earlier after buying that close, a lot of them are giving up with this second pair of consecutive bear bars. Bulls and bears sell. The bulls are giving up and the bears are selling, expecting at least a couple legs down. Big bear bar. The biggest bear bar, 20 or more bars into a trend. More likely an exhaustion bar. Meaning that the bears are probably exhausted. And that will probably have to go sideways to up for 5 or 10 or more bars before the bears can regain control again. What took place here? A lot of the bears are quickly buying back their shorts. They saw this very big bear bar as a gift. A sudden, unexpected, big profit. And they're taking their profit. And the bulls see the same thing and they're buying as well. After a sell climax, the bears buy back their shorts. The bulls start to buy. Usually, you're going to get at least a couple small legs up. And what took place here? Some of the bears held short, even with this bull bar. But at some point, they give up. And this pair of bars probably represents the bears giving up. I talked about the bulls buying closes and the bulls buying this close. And then being disappointed by this bear bar and the next several bear bars. The bulls knew they were at the top of the trading range. But they thought the momentum up was strong enough. So they had a reasonable chance of breaking above. They also knew that the momentum up is strong enough. So that the first reversal down would allow them to get out break even. It would be a bull flag. And the market would test back up to their original entry price. What happened to these bulls after they saw this disappointing follow through? A lot of them placed limit orders to get out break even. They bought that close, disappointed by this bar, tried to get out break even. Maybe they were successful on these bars. And then they had another chance to get out break even here. And what happened when the market went back above their entry price? We have a tail on the top of the bar. It went above the entry price of these buy the close bulls and immediately reversed down. Why would that happen? Well, part of the reason is a lot of these bulls were so disappointed by this and knowing the context, a possible trading range top. They decided to get out break even. They placed a limit order to get out at their entry price. And as soon as the market went a little bit above their entry price, they got out. And the bears knew the bulls were disappointed as well. And therefore, they're looking to sell at the same price, knowing that the bulls will get out there. Bulls and bears selling resulted in that. Some bulls decided that, well, this channel is so tight, chances are, even if we get a big sell-off, the best the bears get is a trading range. The market probably will not fall below this low before it gets back up to that entry price. These buy the close bulls are scale-end bulls, and they'll buy more above a bull bar. When they see this sell-off, especially around a 50% pullback of this rally and a test of that low, they place a limit order to buy on a stop above the bull bar. So they bought here. They bought more here. Their average entry price is the midpoint. They could get out at their average entry price right here. Small loss here. Small profit here. Break even on the trade. Others will try to get out on the test of that high close. Trying to get out break even on their first entry, and then with a profit on their second entry. And you can see we got exactly to that high close and stalled. Most of the bulls who tried to get out at that close were unable. And then they see this small bear bar after that test of that close where they're trying to exit. And they're deciding that, oh, maybe it's not going to allow me out. So some of them started to sell at the market or below bars or even above bars. They'll take a small loss on this entry. Their profit on this entry will be bigger, and they'll end up with a small profit on the trade. What does this tail on the top of this bar and this bar tell you? It tells you that traders were selling, and a lot of those sellers were bulls who bought this close, hoping to be able to get out without a loss. Some did not scale in. They just simply relied on their stock and bet that we would either continue up and they'd make a profit. Or if we sold off, it'll be a bare leg in a trading range, and we'd test back up to the top of the range. In any case, you had bulls who bought that close trying to sell. And when it got at that close, it pulled back. Got at the close, pulled back. I mentioned give up bars. I'm going to talk a little bit about them now. The bulls who bought this close, whether or not they scaled in, tried to get out break-even at that close. It had to get one tick above that close for them to get out. Very few were able to get out with their limit order exactly at that close. And now we have that tail. And now we have a bear bar. So this might be a possible failed breakout. A lot of the bulls will get out on the reversal down below the bear bar. Small loss on the first entry, a bigger profit on the second entry, and they end up with a small profit on the trade. What took place here? Some of the bulls who bought that close did not get their fill here, and they did not exit on the reversal down. And they held, hoping that we would still go higher. But now we're getting a second entry short here, and then here. And a lot of them gave up on the breakout below this small, tight trading range. That created this big bear bar. This is the final bulls giving up. The bulls who bought that close, unable to get out break-even. They had several chances to get back up to their entry price and get out without loss. And they were unable. And this is where they gave up. And this is a give-up bar. The bulls are giving up. And bears are selling as well. They know the bulls are trapped, and therefore the bulls are going to have to sell out of their lungs. And the bears sold, betting that the bulls would be selling as well. Strong bear sell-off. Two, three, four consecutive bear bars bears are selling for any reason, including selling closes. Some sold maybe at one of the closes and then added on. Some bear sold this close, hoping that the bear trend would continue down, knowing that if it reversed up and he managed his trade correctly, he could avoid a loss. Biggest bear bar. One of the biggest bear bars in the bear trend. So possibly an exhaustion bar. And it's testing near the bottom of the bull swing as well. And therefore, it's at support, and we could reverse up. You have a big bar, a cell climax, possible exhaustion, now at support. This could be a cell vacuum test of support, and that could lead to an abrupt reversal. However, when the channel down is this tight, the first reversal up is minor. A lot of the bears who sold that close will use a wide stop, maybe up here or here, and look to sell more higher, maybe two points higher, just below the top of the final cell climax bar. Betting that the channel is so tight, the reversal is minor, the bears should be able to get at least a resumption attempt back down. Finally, I want to talk a little bit about strong bear breakouts. Again, you have a strong sell-off. Bears sold here, and they were disappointed by this. A lot tried to get out break-even at that close. And this got close to it. They were unable. Others sold more higher. If they were very disappointed by this rally, they would try to get out break-even on their trade. One entry price is here. One entry price is here. Their average is here. This bar allowed them to get out break-even on the trade. It did not get below this close, and therefore, they ended up with a loss on this sell. When this reversed up strongly like this, the bears who did not get out break-even on the entire trade gave up. This is a big give-up bar for the bears. The bears who sold this close were confident that they could avoid a loss by scaling in higher. And getting up at the midpoint between their two entry prices. They were hoping to make a profit. Get out break-even on their first entry, and then with a profit on their second. What this tells us is most of the bears who sold this close and sold more higher decided that they just wanted to get out break-even. You can see we did not get below that close. In fact, we only got to within two ticks of that close. And that tells me that there were a lot of buyers somewhere in the midpoint between these two locations where bears would sell. In other words, the bears were so eager to get out, avoiding a loss, that they gave up on the idea of getting a profit. And the bears were buying so aggressively, we got this. And this is the final bears giving up. The bears who tried to get out at this close. They see it got to within a couple ticks of their limit order and started to reverse up quickly. And they just bought at the market, trying to reduce their loss. This tells us that the bears were not trying to get out with a profit. They were simply trying to avoid a loss by scaling in. The bears who were trying to get out back at that low close, once they saw the market start to reverse up, two ticks above their limit order to get out at that low close. The bulls understood what was going on and they knew the bears were trapped. And when it started to reverse up, the bulls started to buy aggressively. We have a trading range and a bear leg in the trading range. Here, we have three consecutive bear bars. We're getting a strong breakout and follow through below the bottom of the range. We have a spike pullback channel. We're also getting a breakout below the bottom of the channel. It's a sell to close sell off. The odds are we're going to go lower. There's not a guarantee that we'll go lower. But given this context and three consecutive bear bars, 60% chance we're going lower. That means 40% chance we will not go lower. Once you get a decent bear bar and a second consecutive bear bar, the market's always in short. And that means the probability is we'll go at least lower enough for the bears to make a profit. The bears will start to sell closes. They'll sell that close. They'll sell this close. And this is a breakout to a new low in the trading range. Most of the bears will put their stop above the top of this final sell climax. The first target that I always consider when I see a breakout like this is a measure move down based upon the bodies. The open of the first bar to the close of the final bar expecting a measure move down. That's also at a support level. So there's another magnet, another reason to get down there. At the moment this bar closed, there was a 60% chance the market would get here before it got here. The reward is equal to the risk. 60% chance we get to the reward before the risk. And therefore, the trader's equation is positive. We had an attempt at a higher low here and we broke strongly below it. Another measured move projection is based upon the height of this bear leg. The bulls hoped it was going to lead to a second leg up. Instead, we got a bear breakout below what they thought was a bull flag. Again, bears will sell closes looking for a test of support here, this measured move, or the bottom of the bull trend. I began by talking about final trend bars. Every trend, after you see it reverse, had a final trend bar. And it's important. Traders are buying closes in bull trends, selling closes in bear trends. And if they get trapped, they have to give up. If the market's in a bull trend and the bulls decide that it's disappointing, the follow-through is disappointing, they try to get out. And if enough of them give up all at the same time, you get a bear trend bar, which is a give-up bar. And the opposite is true at the bottom of a bear trend. If the bears are selling and then they see something that disappoints them, a lot of them will suddenly give up and you'll get a bull trend bar. And I finished up by talking about strong bear breakouts, and I'll continue the discussion that I began at the end of this video. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on entering late-end trends. Thank you.