 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on gaps. I'm going to be talking about two special types of gaps today. The first is a moving average gap bar and the second is an exhaustion gap. Here are a pair of moving average gap bars. There's a gap between the high of the bar and the moving average and then another bar with a gap between the high and the moving average. And they are occurring in a bull trend. Whenever you have a bull trend that lasts 20 or more bars and then you finally get a bar or two or three or five bars that are completely below the moving average, there is a gap between the high of the bar and the moving average. These bars are then moving average gap bars. It's a bull trend. The first time the bears do anything, they usually fail. The first time they get a bear bar, usually the market goes higher. The first time they get a big bear bar, the market usually goes higher. The first time they get a close below the moving average, the reversal attempt fails and the market usually goes higher. And finally, when they are strong enough to put a bar or a series of bars below the moving average, that reversal attempt usually fails. Even though it's a sign of very strong bears, they are strong enough to put bars completely below the average price. The odds are it's going to fail and the bull trend will resume. But having bars completely below the moving average means the bears are pretty strong. That means that there's a 40% chance once the bull trend resumes, the bears will be able to get a major trend reversal into a swing down. Most of the time when you get gap bars late in a bull trend, you get an attempt at a major trend reversal after the bull trend resumes. For example, a lower high major trend reversal, a double top or a higher high major trend reversal. Gap between the high of those two bars and the moving average. This is a bull trend that's been going on for about 40 bars. It finally touched the moving average. There's a gap between the low of this bar and the moving average. A gap between all of these bars and the moving average. When you finally get a touch of the moving average, it's a 20 gap bar buy setup. If a bull trend has been above the moving average for 20 more bars, there are usually bull scalpers buying at the moving average looking for at least a test of the prior high. Here we have a lower high. Here we have a lower high, a minor reversal. The pattern is too small to be a major reversal. Probably going to be a minor reversal down, which means a leg in a trading range. Two legs down, one pullback, two. And look at this bar. There's a gap between its high and the moving average. It's a 20 gap bar bar. It's occurring in a bull trend that has lasted more than 20 bars. The odds are it's going to lead to a resumption in the bull trend. The bull trend or a trading range. In either case, the odds are it's going to test up. Once it tests up, it's probably going to form an attempt at a major trend reversal. If it does, like all major trend reversals, there will be a 40% chance that the bears will get a swing down. A sign of strong bears and therefore the bull trend might be transitioning into a trading range and it might be preparing to transition into a bear trend. A gap bar and a bull trend. It usually leads to the final leg of the bull trend before the bears create an attempt at a major trend reversal. Here the rally went on for a long time. Usually if the rally goes on 20 or more bars, traders start to look again for another topping pattern. Here we have a final bull flag and a reversal up and down. It's also, if you want, a wedge top. One, two, three. Is it a higher high major trend reversal? Probably not on this time frame. Once the rally resumes for 20 or more bars, traders start to look for another topping pattern. Maybe on a higher time frame chart, it's a higher high major trend reversal. But for the sake of argument, let's just call it a higher high major trend reversal. The bears get the reversal and at this point, they have a 40% chance of a swing down, which they got. They have a 60% chance of either a trading range or a bull flag and a resumption of the bull trend. Here we have a triangle for a final bull flag. A triangle late in a bull trend, 20 more bars into a bull trend usually becomes the final flag. And the market usually reverses and then either enters the trading range or has a swing down. We also have a wedge top. And then we have a consecutive top. We have a failed breakout above a triangle. So we have consecutive tops. A wedge top. The bulls broke above it. The breakout failed. And now we have a second top. That has a higher probability of leading to a swing down. This gap bar was warning us that the bull trend may not last much longer before the bears have a significant swing down, as they did here. A strong bull trend above the moving average for a lot of bars. When it finally hit the moving average after 20 or more bars, bulls bought it. We have a higher high here. Not enough bars for a major reversal. Only four or five bars down, five bars up. Probably a minor reversal, which means the sell-off is probably going to be either a bull flag, like a double bottom bull flag, or a trading range. However, we have four bars where there are gaps between the highs of the bars and the moving average. If the bull trend does resume, the resumption will probably attempt to form a major trend reversal. And here we have a lower high of major trend reversal. Probably not enough bars for a major reversal. And therefore, a minor reversal into a bull flag, or a trading range is still more likely. However, you have to be prepared for a major reversal. We have gap bars. We have a rally to a lower high. We have another series of gap bars. Again, signs that the bears are getting stronger, and that reduces the chances that this bull trend will last a lot longer. It increases the chances that the bears will get a major trend reversal attempt, and a 40% chance of a major trend reversal into a bear trend. Bull trend resumed, but weak. We have bear bars. We have a failed breakout above this lower high, and therefore it's a type of higher high double top, and it's a major trend reversal. This was a minor reversal. Very often when you have an attempt at a major trend reversal, and it does not look right. Too many bull bars, or not enough bars in the legs. The market tries to get a double top lower high major trend reversal, which it did here. And this has a higher probability of leading to a major reversal than this. But, like all major trend reversals, it still only has a 40% chance of a bear swing, which ultimately formed here. I'm not going to talk about gap bars in a bear trend. You can see a bear trend lasting 20 or more bars, a bull breakout, and we have a couple bars that are completely above the moving average. A gap between this low and the moving average. The bulls are getting strong. They're strong enough to put bars completely above the moving average. When that happens, and the bear trend resumes, the odds are 60%. The bulls will try to create a major trend reversal. And if they do, they have a 40% chance of actually getting a bull trend. 60% chance the major trend reversal will result in either a trading range or a bear flag. A pair of gap bars completely above the moving average. Bear trend lasting 30 or more bars. And look at this. We have a bar completely above the moving average. There's a gap between its low and the moving average. 60% chance the bear trend will resume and attempt to form a major trend reversal. We've got a lower low, and we're trying to reverse up. 60% chance the bears will get a major trend reversal attempt after a gap bar in a bear trend. 40% chance the major trend reversal will lead to a bull trend. 60% chance the major trend reversal will lead to another bear flag and another leg down or a trading range. 60% chance the bull's finally strong enough to put a bar completely above the moving average. That's a sign that the bulls are getting stronger and the bears are getting weaker. And therefore this bear trend might soon transition into a trading range or possibly even a bull trend. Lower low major trend reversal, but a tight bear channel with a lot of bear bars. Here we have about seven bars without a bull body. Usually that's not going to lead to a bull trend. Usually the market will need some kind of a double bottom with this low. And here we got one more leg down. If you want, you can call it a double bottom or a lower low double bottom. This is a double bottom. This low is below that low. It's also a lower low major trend reversal. Bear trend will break out with good buying pressure, strong enough to get a moving average gap bar, and then a couple of legs down to a lower low. If you want, you can look at this and say, well, this is a lot of bars down. Maybe it's a trend resumption down and maybe we should call it something else like a wedge bottom, which it is. However, despite all of these bars down, a lot of traders would look at it as a lower low major trend reversal. Here's the bear low. We have a gap bar and then a two-legged move down to a lower low. We have a bull IOI. That's a buy setup. Or traders would buy above the pullback here or above this double bottom bull flag. A new bull trend and a bull buy signal bar. I want to talk now about exhaustion gaps. Big bars occurring late in trends often lead to an end of the trend. That means either a pause and a bull flag or possibly a trading range and sometimes even an opposite trend. What I'm looking for is a rally that has gone on for 10 or more bars. And then I need bull bars closing at or near their highs, certainly above the midpoint. And it's often a series of two or three bull bars instead of a single bull bar. There are many ways to draw gaps here. This close to this high or that high. And then now the gap is here to down here. And at this point the gap is this close to that high or that bear high. At the close of this bar we have a gap between its low and this bar before this bull breakout. Let's say a trader is using the top of this pullback as the gap. You could also be using the high of this bar. The rally began with this low. The breakout occurred when this bar went above the high of that bar. So either the high of this bar or the high of that bar is the gap that I'm talking about when I'm talking about a potential exhaustion gap. Usually, the exhaustion gap bars occur around some kind of resistance like a measured move up. The bears tried to get a top here. The top failed. You could say the top was here. We got the reversal down this low below that low. In either case, we have a measured move up in this general area. When you see this series of bull bars late in a bull trend, you don't know if it's going to be a measuring gap leading to a measured move up. The start of an even stronger bull trend. Here, a bull trend with a lot of overlap and pullbacks. Here, a bull trend with no overlap and no pullbacks. Is it going to be the start of an even stronger bull trend? Or is it an exhaustive end of the trend? Is it simply a buy-backing test of resistance? We don't see the bars to the left. But if this is in a trading range, if there are other bars up here, then this is probably a second leg trap. I'll talk about second leg traps in the videos on trading ranges. A second leg trap in a trading range is you have a leg up, a pullback. In a second, even stronger leg up, it's a breakout. And it looks like the start of a new trend, but it's still in the trading range. And it traps bulls into buying high. In a trading range, it's better to sell high, not buy high. Therefore, when you see a strong breakout near the top of a trading range, it's probably a second leg trap. The breakout is probably going to be an exhaustion gap. The gaps will probably close. The market's probably going to sell off and close those gaps. At the close of this bar, we have a gap between this low and that high. Here, we have a gap between this low and this high. The gap is still open. The bulls are hoping this is a pullback that leads to a bull trend. The bears are hoping that this is enough selling pressure, five bars without a bull body, so that we get a lower high and a second leg down, which we did. And as soon as the market drops below these two highs, as it did here, these three bars then become exhaustion gap bars. The final gap, this close and that high, or this pullback low and that high, or at this point, now the gap is this low, the pullback low, and the breakout point high. All of the gaps ultimately closed here. Once you have this rally, this is what remains of the gap. The bottom of the pullback to the top of the breakout point. And this became the exhaustion gap. These are exhaustion gap bars once the market closes all of the gaps. The breakout pullback gap. The bulls are hoping this is just a test of the breakout point and the start of a second leg up. It turned out to form a lower high major trend reversal. Once the gap closes, traders are looking for a test of the bottom of the buy climax, possibly even a bottom of the bull trend all the way down here. The bears are looking for a reversal that closes the gap, which it did, and has two legs, which it did, one pullback two, and about ten or more bars down, which it did. So the bears achieved all of their goals. They closed the gap. They fell below the bottom of the buy climax. They got a ten bar two-legged correction. Next, they want a measured move down from here to the buy climax low down here. We don't know if that happened later. Again, two-legged trap, a rally, pullback, and then an even stronger rally, a breakout. Bulls were hoping for a measured move up. The bears got an exhaustion gap. It traps traders into buying the top of the second leg up. First leg up, weak rally. Second leg up, very strong rally, breakout. A bull trend lasting 20 or more bars. And now we have the biggest bull bar in the entire bull trend. Certainly the biggest bull bar in the most recent 20 bars. It's more likely going to be an exhaustion gap than a measuring gap, because that's what happens. When you have the biggest bull bar late in a bull trend, it's more likely to be an exhaustive end of the trend than the start of an even stronger trend. About half the time, you get one more small leg up before you get a reversal. A big bear bar, that's a big problem for the bulls. They want to have consecutive big bull bars. Instead, they get a big bear bar. At this point, at the close of this big bear bar, closing near its low, there's at least a 50-50 chance the gap is going to close. At this point here, the gap is this close to the breakout point here or here. And once we get the reversal down here, the gap is now this low and these highs. At this point, it's this low and these highs. At this point, the gap is now this low and these highs. And ultimately, the gap completely closed. Therefore, all of these gaps were exhaustion gaps. This big bull bar was an exhaustion gap bar. Exhausted bulls failing to break above the top of a bull channel. The market tested down to the bottom of the buy climax, which is typical. It usually does that. At that point, the bulls want a double bottom with this low and the pullback low and a resumption in the bull trend. And the bears want a break below the buy climax bar and a measured move down. The bull trend is the biggest bull body in at least 20 bars in the bull trend. In fact, it looks like the biggest bull bar in the entire bull trend. Sometimes you get a series of bull bars, two, three, four bull bars, and they form an exhaustive breakout at the end of the trend. For me, I would call this single big bull bar the possible exhaustion gap bar. But the breakout itself is three bars. These two bull bars are not particularly big. And therefore, I don't really look at them as part of the exhaustive move. They're part of the final breakout. And within that final breakout, there's a big bar. This is the bar that I'm looking at as a possible exhaustion gap. A couple points I want to make about this bar. First, it's the biggest bull bar in the bull trend, but it's not especially big. It's not climactic. It's not big enough so that you know people are buying in a panic. However, it's still a probable exhaustion bar. In addition, it has a big tail on its top. So this is not a climactic panic buy. And because you don't have a huge bull bar, you do not have a lot of bulls trapped into buying high. That lack of extreme buying reduces the chances of a huge bear trend. However, whenever you see an exhaustion bar at the end of a bull trend, you've got to be thinking the odds are the bull trend is going to end. And the bulls will wait for 10 bars and two legs before buying again. And the bears might get a major reversal. It's a big bar. Every big bull body is a breakout, a spike, but it's also a bi-climax. The bulls are hoping this gap between this low and this high, between this close and this high, will lead to a measured move up from here to here and then way up on the screen. More likely, the gap is going to close and become an exhaustion gap. And this bar will therefore be an exhaustion gap bar. Here we've got bad follow through. The gap closed. We fell below the breakout point right here. And at this point, this is an exhaustion gap bar. And the bear's got a reversal down. It also fell below the bottom of the bi-climax and fell for about a measure move down from the top of the bi-climax to the bottom of the bi-climax. And here's a measure move down. We have a bear trend. It lasted 10 or more bars. And now we've got a very big bear bar closing below this low. Therefore, this is a breakout point. And at this point, we have a gap between its close and that low. And a gap between this close and this low. As long as the market does not pull back above this low, this is still a breakout bar. And it potentially could lead to a couple of legs down. As long as the market does not rally above this breakout point, there's a potential for a measured move down from this high to this low. And then measured move down. The bears are hoping for an even stronger leg down. The bulls are hoping that the biggest bear body 10 or 20 bars into a bear trend is going to be an exhaustive move. And that the bear trend will end and become either a trading range or reverse into a bull trend. This bar is extremely big relative to the other bars closing on its low. The odds are two things. It'll have at least a small second leg down, which it did. And that it will be an exhaustion bar. And that the gap will close. The market will get above this low. And probably up to this high. And possibly higher. Now here's the monthly boom. Not sure what it will nonprofits would do. You have to wait. The PayPal trade that transfers you once released, back in 2008 installed toLikeUrtTX Ricardo. Once we've had this bull bar and the reversal down, the gap is then between this low and that high. If the market gets above this low, the gap closes, and this bar then becomes an exhausting gap bar. If it does get above this low, it's probably going to get up to or just above this high, and possibly the market could rally for a measured move up based upon the height of this final leg down. The bulls want a double bottom, neckline, measured move up. The bears are still hoping that we are going to keep the gap open and that we just go lower and lower. The bulls obviously won. The bears were hoping this is a bear flag and the start of a big bear trend. The odds were, after such a big bear bar, we were going to get at least a small second leg down, but look at the follow-through, and now we have four bars, five bars without a bull body. It looks like the market's always in long and we're going up to at least this high, maybe a breakout above the neckline of this double bottom. The bulls were able to turn this bar into an exhaustion gap bar by rallying above the low of the breakout point here. But we don't yet know if they're going to get 10 bars two legs up. Right now they have one leg up. It's a strong enough leg up. The odds are the bars that we do not see to the right will be higher than this. Chances are we're going to get a pullback and a second leg up. Maybe a bull trend. We have a bear trend. This is the euro versus the dollar, five-minute chart. And this is the biggest bear bar occurring 30 or 40 or 50 bars into a bear trend. It's a big enough bar so that the odds are we'll get at least a small second leg down. However, whenever you have the biggest bear bar occurring late inner bear trend, 60% chance it's going to be an exhaustive end of the trend, maybe after one more leg down. 40% chance it's going to be the start of an even stronger swing down. For example, a measuring gap. We have a double top here, neckline here, possible measure move down. A lot depends on what the follow-through looks like. If the bears have a second big bear bar, they probably, better than 50%, will get a measure move down from this double top or this double top. Or you can call it a triangle. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Inner trading range. At the close of this bar, we have a gap between this close and the low of the prior bar. This close and this breakout point. And it looks like there's even a gap between this close and that breakout point. Weak follow-through. A big doji. The market reversed up. Although you cannot see it. This is the bottom of a channel. Maybe a wedge bottom. And I said this bar was strong enough so that the odds were we would get at least a small second leg down. Well, the small second leg down might be this doji. We went down here. We went up. We went down here. And then up. So this doji might be all that the bears get. And this could be the end of the bear trend and the start of a reversal up to close all of the gaps below this low. Below that low. Below this low. And most importantly, below that low. This is the end of the session. And the gap remained open. Four consecutive bear bars. Three of them big enough to be part of a breakout. The biggest breakout occurring late and a bear trend. 20 or more bars into a bear trend. More likely an exhaustive end of the trend than the start of an even stronger bear trend. This is possibly a final bear flag. A trading range late and a bear trend. The market might fall for about a measured move, which it has done already. Strong enough series of bear bars. Probably at least a small second leg down. But if the follow through is bad, then probably an exhaustive end of the trend. Three bar bear breakout. Three decent bear trend bars closing around their lows. And now we have even the biggest bear bar of them all occurring 20 more bars into a bear trend. We're also at a measured move target based upon this double top. This high, that high. Neckline. And a round to measure move down based upon the height of the entire trading range. Lots of ways to draw the gap. The gap between the close of this bar and the close of the prior bar or any prior bar. This close and this breakout point. This is a breakout. So this is, for me, the most important gap. If it gets above this breakout point, then I would say this series of bear bars is an exhaustion gap. Breakout point here. Breakout point here. Biggest breakout occurring late and bear trend. More likely an exhaustive sell climax and the end of the trend. Rather than a measuring gap and the start of an even stronger bear trend. When I say the end of a trend, an exhaustive sell climax, that means a pause in the trend. The market can go sideways or up for 10 bars, a couple legs. The bear trend might resume later on. But it's ending for probably two legs up, 10 bars up, approximately. Even though this was strong enough to get a second leg down, it really did not get one. Some traders would say this is the second leg down and it's just a one bar resumption of the bear trend. Clearly have trapped bears who sold this close, trapped by this bull bar. This low never fell below that close. So the bears were trapped. They could never get out without a loss. Once the rally went above this breakout point, the highest breakout point, I would say this breakout is an exhaustive end of the trend instead of the start of an even stronger trend. And at that point, you could call all of the gaps exhaustion gaps. I would call this bar an exhaustion gap bar. I would call these three bear bars an exhaustive sell climax. The bulls have at least 10 bars up. They get above the top of the sell climax and above the top of the final bear leg. But they only have one leg up. It's big enough of a rally so that if we do sell off, the market will probably come back up to this high at some point later on. Because the bears were never able to get out here, chances are the market is going to test back down here. And this whole thing will become a trading range. I don't have enough bars to the right to show that. At this point, chances are we're going to test down here. And after we do, chances are we're going to get a second leg sideways to up. So either we're going to go up here and get a second leg, or we're going to come down here and test back up and get a second sideways leg. We're going to get a second leg. We rallied above the final breakout point and therefore an exhaustive sell climax. And this became an exhaustion gap bar. We went above the top of the sell climax. The bears want a double top, break below the neckline, measure moved on. This is too much of big down, big up, big confusion. It's more likely the market's going to enter a trading range, test down, and then test back up. I begin by talking about moving average gap bars. In a bull trend, the bars are usually mostly above the moving average. If a bull trend goes on 20 more bars and there's finally a bar completely below the moving average, there's then a gap between its high and the moving average. Sometimes you'll get several gap bars. The rally usually resumes. However, once it does, 60% chance the bears will get an attempt at a major trend reversal. Once they do, 40% chance they'll get a swing down. And the opposite is true in a bear trend. If you finally get a bar completely above the moving average, that bar is a moving average gap bar. 60% chance you'll get an attempt at a major trend reversal after a resumption of the bear trend. And like all major trend reversals, you'll have a 40% chance of a swing up. 60% chance the reversal up will lead either to a bear flag or to a trading range. 60% chance the traders will get a lose. 60% chance the traders will get a trend-to-reperty- Kurdish will get a look. If you'll get aboth03 trend moves, then exciting decisively they're going to walk up on the Easy %. And therefore, the traders will present the volatile trend trend item to yield. Any the Zap harder against inflation-to-reperty subir leaders will count against the stock value Marcus frontal다� IQ. So all they can see are the most Nimsen real-to-reperty accepting investor trend, and they're taking back to actual gate 1974 than ever. So its widow is still watching far through the imply바uganes. Dan above those short orange trends, there are因为, I see they need diff Movie Tradingerer ladies and patientailand and crypto-to-reperty trading lives. Traders look for a closure of the gap, and then either a trading range, and then a resumption of the trend, or a reversal of the trend. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of four videos on gaps. Gr машins go around the corner, so... ...來 when we詫 I'm not only emplating I need a control opposite the...! I'll fix this data, so...