 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of three videos on pullbacks and bar counting. In this video, I'm going to be talking about double top bear flags and double bottom bull flags. I will also talk about consecutive reversals, which I sometimes call high four and low four reversals. All double tops are low two cell setups, but don't sell unless the context makes sense. Here we have a small double top. Here we have a bigger double top. Double top, so this is a large low two cell, even though it's subdivided and it's also a wedge bear flag or a wedge lower high. Small double top, so it's a low two. Low one, low two. All wedge tops are low threes. First push up, low one. Second push up, low two did not trigger. Third push up, it's a cell below that bear bar. All wedge bear flags are low three bear flags or low three cell setups. This one is also a double top bear flag. So it's also a low two with this and it's a low three with this one, two, three pushes up. All double bottoms are high two bull flags. We've got a small double bottom here. We have another double bottom here. We have a double bottom here. But you don't enter unless the context makes sense. Double bottom, and a pretty strong bull trend. Reasonable buy. Double bottom, around a 50% pullback. We have a bull breakout of a bear trend. High or low major trend reversal. That is probably an okay buy as well, at least for a bounce up. Now, all wedge bottoms and wedge bull flags are high threes. Sometimes the wedge has four pushes. So one, and then maybe two, and then three, or three, and then four. And a lot of times the count is not clear. So a bear channel, first push down, second push down, third push down. That's one reasonable way to look at it. Then we've got a little double bottom here. One, two. This is below that. You can call it a double bottom. It's also still around a 50% pullback in this bull trend. So a spike pullback channel, probably going to get a bounce up to near the top of the channel. So that is a reasonable buy, especially with good buying pressure. Good bull bar here, and then good bull bar here closing on its high. Very tight channel, so probably a minor reversal. Meaning a bull leg and a trading range, but still can be a profitable buy. Here we have a bull trend, fairly broad channel here, but fairly strong bull trend here. A double bottom. So it's a high two buy, a high two bull flag, a double bottom bull flag. So pretty strong bull breakout. You can buy above that bar. You can buy above any of these bars for trend resumption up. Anytime I see a double bottom, I think of it as a high two bull flag. Three small pushes up, one. And then this tail is two. And then we resumed up with that bull bar. So that's a small wedge, but a fairly tight channel. So a minor reversal in a broad bull channel. So that's not a particularly good sell. And here we have a wedge lower high. Maybe it's a lower high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout, a wedge lower high. If you did take that short and then you start to see two, three, four, five bull bars and a bull breakout above the wedge lower high major trend reversal, you're probably going to get at least one more leg up. So a strong bull breakout above a wedge lower high, a wedge top. You have to assume at least a small second leg up. Is that it? Maybe. Maybe that's the end of it. But we're still going sideways. Maybe this whole thing is another bull flag and we'll get a bigger leg up. Again, you're looking to buy. You see a strong breakout where you're not expecting a breakout. So you got to be thinking the bull trend is going to have at least one more push up. Double tops, double bottoms, they're rarely perfect. We have a double bottom bull flag and a weak bull trend. Second low is slightly below that low, but it's still a double bottom bull flag. This is a double bottom bull flag as well. You could buy above that bar. Two big bear bars, I'd wait for a second entry. Here we have a micro double bottom. Down and then a bull bar, so up and then down again. So maybe buy above that bear bar or above this bull bar. For any of the buys for anything in here, the stop is below the bottom of the bull leg. So trade small enough. And if you exit your long for any reason, you got to look to buy again. If the market does not clearly become short, this is not enough for me to think it's short. If it does not clearly become short, then I'm always looking to buy. If I exit or if I get stopped out, I'm always looking to buy on a reversal back up. So here's a reversal up. So if I exit here, here's a double top, a micro double top, so a second entry short. I'm looking to buy again. Pretty good bull bar. That's a decent buy. Bear breakout, weak rally. And we have a double top. Well, I'm looking to sell a reversal down. This is slightly a lower high. You can sell below that little doji or below that bear bar. In general, I prefer to sell below bear bars. It's a higher probability sell. But I'm sometimes selling a little bit lower, so my risk is a little bit bigger. I'm looking to buy a bull bar. Anytime I see double top bear flags, here's a double top bear flag, and a bear trend, or a double bottom bull flag and a bull trend, I'm always thinking about a measured move. When you look at this, you see all these bull bars, and you think, how can that possibly reverse down? It's a minor reversal. A very tight bear channel, even with four bull bars. Five out of six bars are bull bars. Several, four of them closing on their highs. It doesn't matter. It's the first reversal up from a tight bear channel. It's a minor reversal. The bulls probably need a major trend reversal to create a rally. For the bears, it's a double top and a slightly lower high, and it's a short. Is it a high probability short? Maybe not. Maybe 50% chance, but it's still a decent short. So sometimes you'll have a bear trend with a pretty strong rally, and you think bull trend, but you look to the left and see a tight bear channel, and you say, nah, minor reversal. We'll probably get at least one more test down, and a possible double top. Maybe we'll break below the neckline of the double top and fall for a measured move down. When you have a strong sell-off leading up to the double top, it doesn't matter that this rally is strong. It's still more likely, at best, a bull leg in a trading range, and it might be simple. A bull leg in a double top. We have a double top. The two highs are not at the same price. I always first use the lower high to create the measured move, and if it falls below that, then I'll take a look at a measured move down using the higher one. Here we have a broad bear channel. Sometimes in a broad bear channel, the market has a rally that's so strong that it makes the market always in long, as it did here. But you always have to be suspicious if the rally does not go above the top of the prior leg down. This could simply be a bi-vacuum test with a little bi-climax bar here at the end of that high, and if it turns down from a lower high, you have to be thinking about a possible double top bear flag. You can sell below that bear bar. Probability is we're always in long, so probability is we're going to go sideways. However, there's a 40% chance that we're going to go down. We have a double top neckline. 40% chance we'll fall for a swing down, measured move down. Higher probability, wait for a breakout or a follow-through bar, or a break below the double bottom attempt, especially a big breakout like that, and one of these follow-through bars. You sell the close. So a very strong reversal up. Six or seven bull bars, most closing on their highs, but does not get above the prior lower highs. So we're still on a broad bear channel. Bears will look to sell this. You can call it a double top bear flag, a low two bear flag. You can sell below that bear bar, not yet high probability, but the risk is small because you're selling here. Stop is here. If you wait for a much higher probability short, you stop. Maybe it's here. Maybe it's here. Maybe it's all the way up here. So your stop might be all the way up here. You're risking more, but you have a higher probability of a profit. That's a good trade-off. A sell climax down below the measured move. Double top, neckline, measured move down. Bears tried to take profits, did not get filled, but we did not reverse up strongly. We collapsed down and bears did take profits here. Now we've got a double bottom here and a double bottom here. Do you see the difference between the two? Here we have a bear trend and a double bottom. Maybe this is a reversal. It's probably a minor reversal because it's only a few bars down. It turned into a major reversal, but I call this a major trend reversal or a minor trend reversal because we're in a bear trend. This, however, on the right, we've broken out to the upside already and we're pulling back. I would call this a double bottom bull flag. In a bull trend, if I see a double bottom, I call it a double bottom bull flag. In a bear trend, if I see a double bottom, I call it a double bottom reversal attempt. If I see a double top, if I see a double top, I see a double top reversal. Could be minor, could be major. If we're in a bear trend, clearly a bear trend and then get a double top, I call it a double top bear flag. So bear flag in a bear trend, reversal if it's in a bull trend. trend. It doesn't matter if it's a flag or a reversal, you trade them the same way. Once a clear bear trend is a double top bear flag, double top bear flag, you're looking to sell. Low one, low two, double top, low one, low two, double top bear flag. Every double top in a bear trend is a low two sell setup and therefore an opportunity to get short. Enter on a stop below the prior bar, betting on resumption down. Enter on a stop below the prior bar, betting on resumption down. Very strong bull breakout, probably always in long. Not very good follow through. This is an expanding triangle. Three pushes up and then low and lower. So this is an expanding triangle buy signal and we get a very strong bull breakout. And here we have a double bottom, now in a bull trend. Double bottom, bull flag, looking to buy. Because of the bad follow through, a lot of bulls might not buy this. I think it's okay to buy that. It's a small wedge bull flag. Bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, bull bar. So three pushes down. You might wait instead for the double bottom bull flag, which usually happens if you get too much selling pressure in a very tight bear channel in our first leg down. Sometimes you get a double top and a bull trend and maybe it's a bear trend, but it's not clear yet. It doesn't matter. You trade it the same way, whether it's a double top reversal or a double top bear flag. Here we have a bull trend, a bear breakout, lower high major trend reversal. And it's also a double top, lower high major trend reversal. Double top, lower high major trend reversal. So it doesn't matter if you want to say we're already on a bear trend and it's a double top bear flag. You can call it a double top reversal. Doesn't matter. You trade them the same. You're looking to sell a reversal down, especially below a bear bar like right there. Once you are fairly clearly in a bear trend, you can call it a double top bear flag. But again, it doesn't matter if you call it a flag or a reversal, you're looking to short. I am now going to talk about consecutive reversals. And they are all variations of a high four top or a low four bottom. It's pretty common for the market to try to bottom. Like right here, trying to get a wedge bull flag. One, two, three, or one, two, three. Yet then the bottom fails. When the breakout is strong and it's pretty good follow through, the odds are there'll be at least a second small leg down. Here we have a wedge bull flag. We have a strong bull breakout, wedge bull flag, very weak reversal, weak signal bar. And we got a collapse, a two bar reversal. Big bear bar closing on its low. And then a follow through bear bar closing on its low. Strong enough so that there probably will be at least a small second leg down. It doesn't matter. You can call this a high two. Leg one pull back. Leg two pull back. You can call it a wedge. It doesn't matter. It's an attempt at a bottom. The bull flag. The bulls expected a resumption up. Instead, they got a bear breakout. And then we have a second complex bottom. You can call it a wedge. You can call it a high one, high two. It doesn't matter. It's an attempt at a bull flag. And then we get a second attempt at a bottom. Leg one, leg two. I don't care if you call it high one, two, three, four, five. Or if you call it one, two, three, four. Or if you call it first bottom and then second bottom. Whenever the bottoms are complex, in other words, have two or three legs, and you have a pair of them, the odds of a reversal are higher. So you can call it a high four. Variation with a high five. The key point is we've got a bottom attempt, and it's complex. It has two or three legs. And then a second bottom attempt, again complex, two or three legs. When you get a reversal up from that second bottom, the chances of two legs up are higher. It's a fairly high probability by setup. Some bulls will buy the first reversal up. That's reasonable. And they'll get out here or on that close maybe. Or they'll hold with a wide stop, maybe below here. And then look to add on. Here I would not. Here I would. This is a strong enough reversal so that there's a 60% chance there'll be at least a small second leg sideways to down. Bulls might be disappointed by the buy signal bar, the number of big bear bars compared to the absence of big bull bars, a weak entry bar, a pair of bear bars, so they might get out below that bear bar, betting that we're going to fail, or they'll get out on a stop below that low, or they'll get out on that close or this close. If they do get out, they should be ready to buy again on the next reversal up. This is actually a fairly low probability buy because there's only one decent bull body, and even that bar has a big tail on top. And we have four consecutive bear bars closing on their lows and then a weak buy signal bar. So this is probably going to be a minor reversal, which means a leg in a trading range. Low probability buy, much higher probability buy here. High four, it's often a high two plus another high two. First leg down, second leg down. It's a high two attempt. Here's a second entry on the high two, or you can call it a triangle if you want. Three pushes down, one, two, three, four pushes down. Bear breakout and bear follow through bar, so probably at least two legs sideways to down, one pull back two. Whenever there's a reasonably strong breakout, a lot of bulls will start the count over. You'll see this as first leg down, second leg down. So this is a high one buy here and then a high two buy there. Other bulls will say it's simply the bull flag growing further. And they'll count it as high one, high two, high three, high four. It doesn't matter. The key point is the market tried to resume up here, fail to get a bear breakout with follow through. So probably a couple more legs down and the next reversal up will have a higher probability of being successful. A high four is often a high two plus another high two. Here we have a bull breakout, a high one, and then a high two attempt. This is actually a forex chart and this bear bar actually went one tenth of a pip above that bull bar, enough to trigger a high two buy. And then we had a bear breakout and a follow through. So a high three and then high four. This could have been a high three, but it did not trigger. Whenever there's a big breakout, a lot of bulls will start to count over again and call this a high one and a high two. Other traders will just say it's all part of the original pullback. High one, high two, high three, high four. It's also a large high two. So it's a nested high two pattern. Leg one, pullback, leg two. On a higher timeframe chart, this would be two large legs down, one pullback, two. And each subdivided, one, two. And then this subdivided twice into one, two, three, four. It doesn't matter. The key point is high probability buy above here or above here, at least for a scalp. And at least two legs sideways, two up. First leg pullback, second leg sideways. This bar did not go above this bar. The key point, two legs usually up, but sometimes sideways. Now look at this. There's a high one. There's a high two. There's a high three. If you want, you can say it's a high one, breakout, and then another high one, and breakout, another high one. To me, when you have a tight bear channel like this and it's trying to reverse repeatedly, it doesn't matter. Those reversals are going to be bear flags. You don't want to be looking to buy when the market looks like this. The pullbacks are lasting only one bar, maybe two or three bars, and they're not going up very far. The channel down is very tight. So in a bear trend, you should not be looking for high one or high two or high three buy setups. Bear trends are always forming wedge bottoms. One, two, three. And the channel is so tight here that the odds are the reversal is only going to be minor and create a bear flag, a selling opportunity. Remember, 80% of reversals in strong trends fail. And when the channel is this tight, the chance of a major reversal is small. So you're only going to get a minor reversal, which means a bear flag. Demonstrators know that and they're not looking to buy, but they are paying a lot of attention to these buy setups because they expect they will fail and become bear flags. They are looking to sell. Instead of looking for high one, high two, high three, high four, they're looking to sell low one, low two, low three. Pullback, low one. Breakout, another pullback, low one. Another pullback, you can call it a micro double top. You can call it a low one. You can call it a low two. You can call it a triangle. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Doesn't matter. You just know it's a pullback or a pause in a bear trend and all you can do is sell. Another pullback, you can call it a low one. You can call it a double top bear flag here. You can call it a low two. Doesn't matter. You've got to be looking to sell. I talked about consecutive tops, consecutive complex tops where each of the two tops have two or three legs. Very often it's a low two and then another low two, so it's a low four. I think of all of these tops as variations of low fours, but sometimes they're low fives or low sixes. For example here, one, two, three, so low three. And then we've got a breakout. And then we've got two more legs up here, it's a one, two, three, four, five. It's still a variation of the same process. So when the first attempt at a top is a wedge, you've got a low three. And here we've got a low two after the low three, so it's a low five. It doesn't matter if you call it a low five. It doesn't matter if you start the count over again and say it's a low two and what will probably transition into a trading range. The key point is the bears had a reasonable top, at least for a pullback into a trading range. Instead, there was a bull breakout. And then we have another couple legs up and another reasonable top. Chances are you're going to get at least a couple legs sideways to down. One pullback, two, and actually extended further. Strong bull breakout. A couple bars up above the wedge top. Probably at least two legs up. So one pullback, two, maybe three. And a lot of traders will just start the count over again anytime there's a big breakout. One, two, three, four, five. Doesn't matter if you call it a low five or consecutive tops. The key point is you have a complex top, two or more legs, and then another complex top, two or more legs. The probability is high that you're going to get at least a couple legs sideways to down. If you do sell here, you can get out with a stop there. You can get out with a stop above this bar. Or you can hold and use the measured move up. Maybe a little bit greater than the height of the wedge up here somewhere. And then look to add on. I would not add on on the first reversal down, although you could. However, this is a high probability. Add on there. So you can exit above the wedge and then look to sell the reversal down, expecting at least a couple legs sideways down. A lot of bull bars, pretty tight channel. Really not a very high probability short. However, it's a reasonable short. And whenever you take a reasonable trade, if you manage it correctly, 90% of the time, a good trader can avoid a loss and usually make a profit. Here we have a bear breakout and a low one and a low two. One problem is you get five bars without a bear body. And in fact, you get eight or nine bars without a bear body. So this is not a very good looking low two sell signal, despite a very strong breakout. However, you have to be aware of the possibility of a low four and a trading range. So low one, low two, bad sell. And we get a bull breakout and a follow through bar, probably at least two legs up, one pull back two. And up here, it's a very tight bear channel. A very low probability sell, except that we're testing this high. And this looks like a trading range. Mini reversals up and down. Bull breakout. We're going to start the count over again. Complex top, low one, low two. Breakout, low one, low two. High probability that the reversal down here will be minor and lead to a trading range because the channel is so tight. But the context is good for the bears. So some bears will take that short. Other bears will wait for a second entry, like below that bear bar. If you want, you can call it a low four. Does not matter. The same is true in a bear trend. You got a reversal, maybe a trading range. It is a trading range. But a lot of traders will be looking to sell. You can say this is a low one, low two. You can say this is a low one, low two. Then we got a breakout and then pretty much sideways for a second leg up. Strong breakout. So a failed low two. But now you can look at it as a wedge. One, two, three. Some traders will sell below here. And management is a little bit tricky. They might get out above this. They might get out above here. If you do get out above there, you got to be looking to sell again because of the possibility of a complex top. We tried to top here. We got a breakout and then a second leg up to a complex top. Or you can look at it as a wedge. One, two, three. And then a bull breakout above a wedge. In general, if you get a bull breakout above a wedge top, 50% chance the breakout will be successful. 50% chance the breakout will fail and reverse down. This is not a strong looking bull breakout. This is a terrible looking bull breakout bar. Once you see this bar, you know the odds are not 50%. They're more like 60% that the breakout will fail and we'll get a couple legs sideways to down. You can count it. You can count it. Low one, low two. Low one, low two. Wedge one, two, three. Even though this high is below that high. The market is trying to form a bear flag. They got a small bear breakout. And the key point is it was followed by a strong bull breakout. So probably a couple legs sideways to up. It's a variation of a low four. The key point is it's a second attempt to reverse. So higher probability. Here a very strong bull trend. We had a wedge top. One, two, three. Maybe another wedge top. One, two, three. Strong bull trends. Maybe a power block wedge. One, two, three. Strong bull trends are always forming wedges. They're always trying to reverse. But look at the pullbacks. A couple of tiny bars. One bar. One bar. You cannot be looking to sell this. Gaps between this high and that low. This high and that low. This is an extremely strong bull trend. So don't start looking for low one, low two, low threes. When you're in a very strong bull trend, a low one, low two, low three is a sell setup and you cannot be looking for sell setups. So instead of looking for low one, low two, low three, low four, you should only be looking to buy. You should expect each one of these reversal attempts to create bull flags. A high one, a high one, high one. And you should be looking to buy the bull flags and not sell the tops. At some point, the market evolves into a trading range. And at that point, it's no longer a strong bull trend. And if you're going to trade it, you trade it like a trading range, not like a trend anymore. You're buying low, you're selling high and scalping. I talked about a low four, you know, one, two, three, four. On a higher timeframe chart, it's usually a low two. And if you go to a high enough timeframe chart, it's a low one. So a five minute chart, low one, low two, low three, low four. On a 10 minute chart, it's just low one, pullback, low two. Complex corrections like this are usually simple corrections on a higher timeframe. After each breakout, you start to count over again. We got a breakout, high one, a breakout, high one, breakout, high one, high two. Small breakout, you can call it a high one or you can call this a double bottom and say, this is a complex high one and high two. Doesn't matter, it's a bull trend you're looking to buy. In this video, I talked about double top bear flags and double bottom bull flags. I then talked about complex reversals, which are variations of high four bottoms and low four tops. This is Al Brooks.