 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth of seven videos on breakouts. In this video, I'm going to be talking about failed breakouts and how they can lead either to trend resumption or a trend reversal. Remember, a breakout is simply a trend bar. It can be two or three trend bars. It could be ten trend bars. But a breakout is simply a trend bar. Here we have a breakout that lasted three bars. We have three consecutive trend bars. And then we have an attempt at a failed breakout. We have a bear bar closing on its low. And the bears are trying to end the breakout. They want the market to reverse back down. If this failed breakout fails to stop the trend, then you get trend resumption up. And that was the case here. We have a bull breakout, an attempt at failure, but the failure failed. So you have a failed bull breakout, yet it became a bull flag and the bull trend resumed. We have another bull breakout here. We have a bull bar, a bull trend bar, so it's a breakout. We have consecutive bull trend bars. So the consecutive bull trend bars created an even bigger breakout. We had a one bar breakout, and now it became a two bar breakout. And it's followed by a bear bar. The bears are trying to get the bull breakout to fail and reverse. In this particular case, the failed bull breakout, so we have a bull breakout, it's failing. It led to a trend reversal down. Remember, we had a bull breakout here, a failure, yet it was followed by trend resumption up. Here, we have a failed breakout, and it was followed by trend reversal down. We have a bear channel, so a bull flag. It's about a 50% pullback of this initial rally. And we have a bull breakout. We have a bull bar here, so it's a breakout. And the breakout extended for another five bars. So you can say the six bar rally is a six bar bull breakout. And then here, we're in a bull trend, and we broke below a bull flag. And we broke below a bull channel. We have a bear breakout. Four consecutive bear bars. None is especially big. This is pretty good. We have a consecutive bear bars here, and then a doji. It's a breakout, but not particularly strong. Remember, every trend bar is a breakout, and every bar with a prominent tail is a failed breakout. Almost every bar on every chart is either a breakout, a failed breakout, a reversal, or a breakout pullback, a flag. Bull breakout, and the bears tried to reverse. Their reversal failed, and it became a bull flag, and it was followed by a trend resumption up. Traders will bet the breakout is strong enough, the contact's good enough, a 50% pullback in a bull trend. Micro double bottom down on that bear bar, and then up and down on that bear bar. So, bulls will look to buy a breakout above that micro double bottom. The neckline is the bull bar here, so they'll buy above the bull bar. It's the same price as buying above that bear bar. In either case, they're going to be buying with a stop. Maybe they'll buy the close of that bull bar. Maybe they'll buy one pip above the high of that bull bar. In any case, they're viewing this attempt at a failed bull breakout as a bull flag, and they're buying as it reverses up, betting that the bull trend will resume. Here we have a bear breakout, an attempt at a failure bear breakout. Bulls are hoping to create a failed bear breakout. About a 50% pullback from the bull trend. Maybe a breakout test of these highs. We have a high, we broke above it, and now we're pulling back testing it. The bulls are hoping that this bear breakout will fail and reverse up. Bears are hoping the opposite. They're hoping that the bear breakout will succeed and lead to a measured move down, or at least low enough down to make a profit. We tried to reverse up. The bulls are trying to make the bear breakout fail. The bears are betting the bear breakout will be successful. They'll place stop orders to go short just below the low of the prior bar, and they would be filled right here. And they did get enough down for at least a scalp. Every trend bar is a breakout. Every series of trend bars is a breakout. A breakout can be a single bar, and it can be a series of bars. Here, we have a pair of consecutive very big bear trend bars. You can say the breakout began there, but I think the breakout began here. I would view this as a 2 bar bear breakout, yet it's a 5 bar bear micro channel. 5 bars down without a pullback. It's a strong bear breakout. The bulls are giving up. Bulls are selling out of their longs, and bears are selling into shorts. Strong bear breakout. You have trapped bulls who have not yet exited their longs. They're hoping for any kind of a pullback so they can get out with a small loss. You have bears who saw this happening, but for whatever reason did not short, and they're trapped out. They're looking for any kind of a pullback so that they can short at a higher price. We have a reversal. Bear breakout and an attempt at a failed bear breakout. But look at the reversal attempt. A lot of bars with small bodies, prominent tails, and a lack of consecutive big bull bars. We have a pair of bull bars here, consecutive, but small compared to the bear breakout bars. So this is probably a minor reversal, which means either a bear leg in a trading range or a bear flag. And in either case, you'll expect at least a small second leg down. Here we got trend resumption down, not simply a dip in a trading range. So this became a bear flag in a trading range instead of a bull leg in a trading range. This rally is mostly from bears taking profits, trying to reduce their risk. So if they short, their stop is now far away. And the best way to reduce that risk is by reducing their position size. So you have bears buying back part of their position, taking partial profits. Whenever I see a breakout, we have a bull breakout, and then I see a reversal, a failed breakout, I'm always comparing the strength of the breakout and the reversal. Here, we don't have much information, so maybe we have to look at some additional bars. We have a weak breakout up and a fairly weak breakout down. We have a bear bar, but a doji follow-through bar, and it's still a higher low. Bull breakout, but no consecutive big bull bars closing on their highs. We have a bear breakout, but no consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows. Bad follow-through. The bulls have a breakout, but look what it's followed by. And we have a bear breakout, and look what follows the bear breakout. A lot of overlap, and gaps are filled immediately or pretty quickly. Gap, this closed that high. Tried to get a gap here, but it could not close above that bar. Whenever a situation like this is unclear, bull breakout, possible reversal, possible bull flag, things are unclear. Usually that means sideways. Usually better to wait. Wait for more bars, wait for more information. Here, bull breakout, bear breakout. Big up, big down. Actually, a small version of it leads to big confusion and sideways. This is bad context for taking trades. The range is so tight, very difficult to make money. Even scalping, even with limit orders. There's no significant buying or selling pressure. Alternating bull and bear bars, prominent tails, small bodies, lots of little dojis. A very tight trading range. Better not to trade. Is one side clearly stronger here? Are the bulls clearly stronger? It's still lower highs. Are the bears clearly stronger? No. If one side is clearly stronger, then that increases the chances that that side will win, and we'll get a breakout in that direction. At this point, is it still unclear? Or is one side clearly stronger? The bears have a bear bar closing on its low. It's a big bear bar. It closed below the low of the past 20 or 30 bars. The bears are clearly stronger. The odds are we're going at least a little bit lower. We have three consecutive bear bars. A very big bear bar closing far below the lows of all the prior bars. Odds are 60% chance this bar will result in some kind of a measured move down. So chances are we're going lower. And that's why the bar looks like this. Everyone saw it as it was forming. It was becoming a big bear bar. And traders were selling, betting that it would go lower quickly. It might pull back, but it may simply go straight down. So a lot of traders were willing to sell right away just in case there is no pullback. Good context for a breakout, a successful breakout, we're in a tight trading range. We're in breakout mode. One side is probably going to win. And then we got a bar, a huge bar. Big gap between the close of the bar and the low of the prior bar. The close of the bar and the low of the past 30 bars. Lower prices are likely. The bears are clearly stronger. Bear breakout. And look what followed. Good follow through. Big bear bar closing on its low. That increases the chances that we're going lower. Now we have four consecutive bear bars all closing on or near their lows. Chances are the first pullback. Traders will sell it and we'll get at least one more leg down. Bulls are hoping for any kind of a pullback so they can sell out of their losing longs. Bears are hoping for any kind of pullback so they can sell at a higher price. Strong breakout like this probably will result in at least a measured move down from the open of the first bar of the breakout to the close of the final bar. We may get other bars in this breakout but at this point this is the final bar of the breakout. And you can see we fell for about a measured move down from the open of this bar close of that bar. Again tight trading range. Very big bear breakout. Fairly prominent tail but a close below the low of the prior bar. Close below the low of the past 10 or 20 bars. Traders need follow through. It's possible that this is simply a trap that will reverse immediately up. Big bear breakout need follow through. The bears prefer to get it on the very next bar. But sometimes it doesn't come on the next bar. Sometimes you'll get a rally for several bars. Five bars, ten bars into a bear flag and then you get the second leg down. If you do not get follow through selling fairly soon, the market can reverse up. If you go sideways for ten bars, twenty bars, the probability of the bears getting a second leg down drops. And after about twenty bars, the probability of a second leg down becomes the same as the probability of a reversal up. The market becomes neutral. Maybe after ten bars, maybe after twenty bars. At some point it becomes neutral again. Look at this. We have a great bear bar, but look what followed. If this was a trading range day or a broad bear channel, traders would look at this and say, Ah, it's a second leg trap. I'm going to buy above the high of this big bull bar, betting that this is just a trap. Trapping traders into selling low. At this point we have big down, big up. Confusion, big confusion. You have to assume sideways. And then the market is in breakout mode. At this point we totally reversed the bear breakout and we went sideways. So even though it's only about ten bars, I think the market is completely neutral. Fifty percent chance the next move will be up. Fifty percent chance the next move will be down. The bears gave up. It's a failed bear breakout. This bull bar to me means it's a failed bear breakout. This bar going above that bar confirms the failure. Failed bear breakout does not mean bull trend. It just means the bear trend has ended and now the market is neutral. In this particular case, it did lead to a reversal. Bear breakout, very strong. Bull breakout, equally strong. Market is neutral. And we enter a triangle and then we got a bull breakout. Possibly the start of a bull trend. Here we have a pretty strong bear trend. Lasted about 20 bars. Very tight channel. We're getting a bull breakout. Usually, if you get a bull breakout above a very tight bear channel, the first reversal up is minor. Usually the market has to go up five or ten bars and then the trend resumes. If the bulls at that point can reverse it up a second time, some kind of a double bottom, maybe slightly higher, maybe slightly lower, they create a major trend reversal. A major reversal. But at this point, the odds are this reversal will be minor. Usually the first breakout above a protracted bear channel, a tight bear channel that lasts a lot of bars, is minor. The bulls have a micro double bottom. They have a possible one bar final flag. And they have a big bull bar closing on its high, above the high of the past six bars. All good for the bulls. Yet, probably minor. Minor means the first reversal up probably will not get very far. So what happens? Bears will look at that and say, huh, we got a strong bull bar, but it's probably a minor reversal. It probably will fail around the moving average. I'm going to sell the close of that bull bar, betting that it's going to be a failed bull breakout. That is a logical thing to do. More likely a minor reversal and a trading range or bear flag than the start of a bull trend. Not much risk selling a strong bull close at or near the moving average, betting the bull reversal will fail. Because it probably will. Other traders will say, okay, I don't want to sell a big bull bar, but we have a bull breakout with a bear bar closing on its low. I will sell below the low of that bear bar, betting that the bull breakout is failing and that it's a two bar bear flag. And the bear trend will probably resume. We're reversing up again here. This is a second reversal up. So it's a double bottom. I know this low is far below that low, but it's still a type of a double bottom and possibly a major trend reversal. I said this reversal, first reversal from a tight channel, minor, but that if we do get a resumption of the trend down and then another reversal, that could be major. And lead to a change in the direction of the trend. The major trend is down and now the bulls have a chance of turning the trend into up. Here we have four consecutive bull bars and two of them are very big. Two of them are closing on or near their highs. In fact, this is closing near its high as well. This is a strong enough reversal so that probably at least a little bit more up is likely, maybe a measured move up. Also, the context is good. It's a double bottom after a pretty good breakout above a very tight channel. So this could be a lower low major trend reversal leading to a major reversal of the trend. A major bear trend, maybe the start of a major bull trend. At this point, we're still getting lower highs. So we're still in a broad bear channel. But this is a pretty strong reversal. Following fairly closely after this bull reversal, it increases the chances that we're going higher. The overall bear channel still fairly tight. Not too many bars up. Possibly still a minor reversal. In fact, it did become a reversal. You want to call it major, you want to call it minor. It was enough for traders to make a swing trade. I would call it a major reversal, but not enough to get above the top of the bear trend. And what we got was ultimately a trading range. At this point, after this much of a reversal, traders will look at the next reversal up as a major trend reversal. This, is it a higher low major trend reversal? With five consecutive bear bars, probably not. It's probably more big up, big down, big confusion and sideways. However, here we have a double bottom, slightly lower low, double bottom, a micro double bottom. This has a better chance of becoming a higher low major trend reversal. In this video, I talked about failed breakouts and how they can become flags and lead to trend resumption or they can lead to a reversal. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth of seven videos on breakouts. This is the fifth of seven videos on breakouts. Thank you.