 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on swing trading and scalping. Sometimes traders will take a trade as a swing and because of the way the price action is unfolding, they'll convert it to a scalp. One of the highest probability trades that a trader can take is entering during a strong breakout, betting that the breakout will continue. Therefore, the math is okay to scalp in a strong breakout. A very bad thing to do is take a trade as a scalp and then it starts to go against you and you decide to convert it into a swing. That is a losing strategy. You're going for a small reward, yet you're willing to accept an increasing loss so much so that you need an extremely high winning percentage to make the strategy profitable. What is the new tick? Every new tick that comes on every chart gives you new information. If you enter a trade for one reason and then the information makes you think that your premise is no longer good, you have to make a change in what you're doing. For example, we have a strong bear trend. It's a sell to close strong bear breakout at this point and you have a low one short. We have a pullback in a bear trend where the market sold off for about 10 bars without a bull body. However, two consecutive dojis, trading range price action, and consecutive sell climaxes all the way down. There, here, a little bit here, these two bars, and then this entire sell off is a big breakout bar on a higher time frame chart. It's a big sell climax, late in a bear trend, breaking below the bottom of a bear channel. Chances are the market's going to reverse soon. This is a low probability short and therefore only a swing. You're betting that an oversold market is going to get a lot more oversold. Chances are it will not. Whenever you take a trade that does not have a very high probability of success, you have to be swing trading because you need a big reward to offset the low probability. This is not a good scalp selling below that bear bar. Here we have another big bear bar. In fact, this is the biggest bear bar in 20 or 30 bars. Whenever you have the biggest bear bar coming in a bear trend after the trend has lasted 20 bars or more, it's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend rather than a measuring gap leading to an accelerated trend down. When a trend ends, it converts either into a trading range or into an opposite trend. This is a high probability bar indicating that the trend will either end here or very soon. It's a probable exhaustion gap. The gap once this bar closes is between the close of this bar and the breakout point this low. High probability that that gap is going to close soon and in fact it closed two bars later. Had you taken this short as a swing short and then you see this big bear bar late in the bear trend, you have to be thinking, uh oh, this might be the end of the trend and not the start of a new leg down. And then you get a bull bar reversing, closing near its high. A swing trader should exit above this bull bar because the premise of a continued bear trend is probably very low probability at this point. Probably the best the bears get is sideways for five or 10 bars. Did he make a profit? He might have made a very small profit. He converted his swing trade entering here into a scalp entering here. We're now in a bull swing, but it's the first strong breakout above a bear channel. This rally is probably a minor reversal and it probably is going to convert into a trading range fairly soon. If you want, you can call this a triangle. We have a pair of small dojis after a big bull bar and after a down bar here. First push down, second push down, and then third push down on a smaller time frame chart. This is a triangle and it's occurring fairly late in a rally and this rally is probably going to be a bull leg in a trading range because it's the first breakout of a very tight bear channel. The reversal up is probably minor and then once it pulls back, the bulls can get a higher low major trend reversal. Since this is part of a minor reversal, it probably is not going to go up all that much higher. A relatively low bet for a swing up. Since the first leg up after a very tight bear channel is probably a bull leg in a trading range and then you suddenly get a very big bar, 15 or more bars into the range. You have to be thinking of this as possibly a second leg trap. It's not really a second leg, unless you call this whole thing first leg pull back second leg. You can call it a parabolic wedge, one, two, three, but a very big bull bar late in a bull leg and what is probably going to be a trading range, probably a climactic end to the bull leg. Also, it's testing near the top of the bear leg. That is a logical resistance area and a good place for bulls to take profits and for bears to start to look for shorts. You have a big bear reversal bar closing on its low. Now we have big up, big down, a triangle late in a trend, probable final flag. Most swing traders who bought above here should exit at this point. Big up, big down, probably big confusion in a trading range. Also, you're near the top of a trading range and this is probably a bull leg in a trading range, which means you're probably going to get a bear leg in a range. Once you see this reversal, traders should exit their swing below that low. They'll have made a profit from here to here. It'll be small. They began taking a swing trade, hoping that this would be the start of a bull trend, even though it probably would have to form a major trend reversal before you can get a bull trend. Low probability swing by and most bulls who took that swing trade would get out right here below that bear bar, converting their swing into a scalp. Any time you take any kind of a trade, swing or scalp, after you enter, if the premise is no longer valid, if the trade is unfolding in a way that's not consistent with what you were expecting, you simply get out, even if it's for a loss. Four consecutive bear bars closing on or near their lows. Some traders would sell this bar, even though it's a breakout and not a follow-through bar after the breakout. But some traders will take a chance they'll sell here and put a stop above the top of the bear leg. I usually wait, if I did not sell earlier, I usually wait for a follow-through bar. In other words, another bear bar closing near its low. And here, instead of a bear follow-through bar, we have a bull follow-through bar. That makes a bear trend less likely and a pullback into at least a trading range or possibly a bull trend more likely. That is bad follow-through after a bear breakout below our trading range or prior low. The bears who sold this close, their stop is above the top of the bear leg or maybe above the top of the cell climax, the four consecutive bear bars. Bad follow-through, a bull bar, a doji bar, a doji bar, another bull bar. The bears who took this short are thinking, uh-oh, this might be a trap and a failed breakout and it could quickly lead to a reversal up. Most bears would probably exit above this bull bar. Others would exit maybe above the top of this doji bar, that doji bar or this second bull bar. And you can see when it went above the second bull bar, it started to accelerate upward. This pair of bars is a sign that the final bears are giving up. Whenever a trade goes against you but you think your premise is still valid, you can scale in and simply rely on a logical stop. We have a strong bull breakout after a failed bear breakout. Just like the bear sold this close, the bulls will buy that close or they'll wait for another bull bar and buy the close of that second bull bar. They have it here. Even though it has a big tail on top, you have trapped bears who are looking for any kind of a sell-off so they can get out with a smaller loss. You'll have bulls who did not buy the reversal up and they're hoping for any kind of a pullback so that they can buy. Buying up here, you're betting on either a bull trend or a trading range. If it's a trading range, it'll sell off and it'll come back up to the top of the range. This is a high probability trade. Buying this close has a high probability of either making a profit or avoiding a loss if you can scale in lower. You buy that close, you put a stop below the bottom of the bull swing. And then you're disappointed by the follow through. One bear bar, two bear bars, three bear bars. Maybe it's going to reverse down just like this bear breakout reversed up. More likely, after a failed bear breakout and a strong bull breakout, the best the bears will get is a trading range for five or ten bars. And therefore, the bulls who bought up here can hold through these bear bars, betting that the market will come back up to that high close where they bought before it gets down to their stop below the bottom of the bull swing. These bulls might add on at a scalp lower. For example, if this is a five minute forex chart, they might add on 10 pips lower. If it's an e-mini chart, they might add on one or two points lower. They always want to add on at least as big as a scalp below because they're trying to get out, break even on their first entry if the market gets back to their first entry. And they want to make a scalper's profit on their second entry. Many bulls will look to enter above a bull bar. We have a doji here, not particularly strong, but they might enter above this bar, no fill, or they might enter above this bar. We have an III and a bull bar closing on its high. If this entry point above the high of this small bull bar is at least as big as a scalp below this close, it's a reasonable entry. Betting that will come back to that close at a minimum. And you can see what happened. Bulls bought this close. They did not like this. They decided they wanted to get out break even if the market could back to their close. And some of them will add on here as long as the distance between this and that is at least as big as a scalp. And what happened when we get back to that close? It went a little bit above and that allowed these bulls to exit with a limit order break even. And if they bought more here, then they made a scalp profit when the market went back slightly above their first price. The bulls who bought here, they were using a swing stock. Whether or not they were scalping or swing trading, it's high probability that they would make money or not lose money. So it's okay to scalp. And they got a scalp on their second entry and they get off break even on their first. As long as the breakout is continuing, you can repeat the process. You can use a swing stop and scale in if the market goes against you. If you sell anywhere in here, your stop is up here. It does not matter if you sell that close or this close or below this bull bar, even selling below this bear bar, the stop for all of those trades is up here. Let's say you happen to sell right down here, the lowest close of the entire sell-off. When you're taking that short, you don't know that it's the final bear bar, but you soon discover that it is. Mathematically, it's still a reasonable thing to do. We have consecutive sell climaxes, bear bar here, bear bar here, then three bear bars, a sell climax, and then two bear bars, a sell climax, but a fairly big bear bar, possible one bar final flag and a tail, probably going to get a pullback in a trading range soon. The math is still okay to sell that close because the first reversal up from a tight bear channel probably is going to be either a bull leg in a trading range, or it'll be a bull channel that becomes a bear flag. In other words, the odds are, whatever rally we get, we'll come back down and test this close before it gets up to that swing stop. Therefore, some traders will sell this close and look to sell more higher and put a stop up here. Scale-in traders have to trade small because whatever risk they have, it has to be no greater than the risk on any other trade. And if they enter a second time or even a third time, the total risk from all three entries has to be no greater than the risk on any other trade. So they have to trade small. The stop is far away and they're adding to a position. Some traders who sold this close would look to sell more, maybe two points higher, and they would get filled right here. They would keep their stop here above the top of the bear swing. It's a swing stop. But they're confident that the first reversal up would be minor, becoming either a bull channel, bear flag, in which case they would expect a sell-off back down to test that close, or it could simply be a bull leg in a trading range. Trading range, you get a leg up, you expect a leg down back to that close. Look what happened here. The trader sold here. He sold more two points higher. He placed a limit order to get out at that low close. The market hit his order. Most traders would not be filled. Then we get a bull bar closing on its high. Traders at this point would assume that these sell-the-closed bears are trapped and they're going to buy back their shorts. You can see this big bull trend bar. It's a give up bar. Traders who are aware of what's going on, traders selling this close, disappointed by the bull bar, selling more higher, trying to get out, break even on their first entry, and with a scalp profit on their second. Most of them did not get out with a profit. They exited above here, around break even on their second entry and with a small loss on their first entry. Other traders would see that and say, well, it's still probably a minor reversal up. This is not enough bars up, not enough bars down for this to be a major trend reversal. It's therefore a minor trend reversal as long as we stay below the top of the most recent major lower high, the top of this bear breakout. And therefore they'll add on again. For example, they might add on two points above their second entry and they'd get filled here, or they would sell on a reversal down below a bear bar and they'd get filled right here. It's a big low two short. One leg up, there's the low one, second leg up, and then this is the low two. It's also around a 50% pullback and what could end up being a bear channel, a reasonable location for bears to sell. The swing down tested the low close and they get out break even on the first entry, two points profit on the second entry, four points profit on their third entry. But again, they only take that trade if they're trading small enough so that the entire risk from all three entries is no more than they would have on any other trade. When you're entering during a strong breakout, in the direction of the breakout, you have a high probability of making money. And therefore it's reasonable to scalp if you can make the decisions fast enough. When there's a strong bear breakout, the probability of the market moving down X number of ticks before it goes up X number of ticks is between 60 and 80%. X can be any size, two ticks, five ticks, 15 ticks, 27 ticks. Strong bear breakout, good follow through. If you sell this close, there's at least a 60% chance that the market will fall X number of ticks before it goes up X number of ticks. You pick the number, you know, five ticks probably will fall five ticks before it goes up five ticks. 10 ticks probably will fall 10 ticks before it goes up 10 ticks. It's a high probability sell, at least a 60% chance of a measured move based upon the height of the breakout, the open of this first bar, the close of that final bar. Let's say you're using a two point stop. Strong momentum down, strong breakout, 60% chance the market will fall two points before it rallies two points. Reward equal to risk, but probability 60% because of the strength of the bear breakout. Therefore, it's a reasonable traders equation to exit with the reward equal to your risk. You sell that close, and if you want to use a two point stop, your stop is right there. You can place a limit order to get out with a two point profit, which would be right here. Here's a 60 minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. In a strong bull breakout, the probability of making X pips up before X pips down is between 60 and 80%. It doesn't matter what X pips are. It could be X could be five pips. So the probability of making five pips before losing five pips is at least 60%. The probability of making 29 pips before losing 29 pips, at least 60%. Therefore, the risk equals the reward, but the probability is high 60% or greater. This trade has a good traders equation, and it's a good strategy. Here we have a very big bull bar breaking out of a trading range. Bull trend resumption. Bull trend, trading range, two legs down, one pull back two. And now we're clearly breaking to the upside, and we have a follow through bar. When you have a strong breakout, close above the high of the past 30 bars, and then you have a strong follow through bar, there's a 60% chance the market is going to rally for a measured move based upon the size of the breakout. For example, from the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar. The breakout grew here and it grew here. If you entered here, there's a 60% chance it would go for a measured move from this open to that close before it fell below this low. Good strategy to buy the close of that follow through bar. Let's say you wanted to risk 50 pips and go for a profit target of 50 pips. You buy that close, you place a stop 50 pips below. There's a 60% chance it'll go up 50 pips before it goes down 50 pips. You can place a limit order to take profits 50 pips above, and you can see the high of this bar is slightly above that limit order, and you would have been filled right here. You would exit with a 50 pip profit. I would call that a scalp on the 60 minute chart. You held for only a couple bars, a few bars, and you did not allow any pullbacks. This is obviously a strong bull trend in the E-mini, a five minute chart. You can see gaps and negative gaps. This high, this low, this high, these lows, this high, these lows. It's a small pullback bull trend. Chances are it's going to continue a long time. Always in direction is clear. Probability is high enough so you can scalp repeatedly instead of swing trading. For example, a bull scalper can keep buying for any reason and repeatedly take one to two points profit. You could buy below a bear reversal bar. You could buy a bear close, bidding at the bear reversal attempt will fail. You can buy above a bull bar, bidding on trend resumption. We have a bull flag, a triangle, a bull breakout, a pullback, high two pullback, high one, high two. You can buy that. You can buy at the market. You can buy for any reason and keep trailing your stop below the most recent major high or low. A bull breakout here, breakout here. Maybe you put your stop down here. If you buy anywhere in here, you have a new breakout to a new high with a couple of strong bull bars. If this is going to continue as a small pullback bull trend, it should not fall below this low. So if you buy at any point, even if you bought down here, after you've had this leg up, traders can raise their stop to right here. You could buy and take a point or two profit and just buy repeatedly taking one or two points profit. And you can see there are at least 10 reasonable buy scalps. In fact, there are probably 20 or 30 good buy scalps during this bull trend. So you can buy, exit, buy, take profit, buy, take profit, buy, take profit. However, as simple as that sound, it's very hard to do because a lot of times you'll exit and then you'll need to take a break, an emotional break for several bars, and then you will not reenter. You'll start thinking that maybe it'll pull back and you'll get a deeper pullback. Maybe it'll reverse. Most traders cannot keep entering and taking profits, entering and taking profits. You end up missing too many trades. Strong bull breakout, four big bull bars closing on their highs. It's much more profitable and much more reliably profitable to buy and hold on as long as the premise of a strong bull trend is valid. For example, you buy above this bull bar and you hold to the end of the day and you have a bear bar closing on its low, betting that the market will have some profit taking into the close. You're going to make far more money buying here and exiting there than buying and exiting repeatedly on the way up. This is a five minute chart of the euro versus the dollar. A very strong bear trend. A trader can sell at any point and scalp if he wants. High probability of making money if you're scalping and you can do it repeatedly. The direction is clearly down and we're probably going lower. Therefore, high probability of making a reward at least as big as your risk, wherever your risk is. A bear scalper could keep selling, taking 20 pips profit and then selling again and do that all day long. We have a bear breakout, a follow through bar, sell to close. A bull bar, so a pullback, sell below the bear bar. We have another pullback, sell below the bear bar. A little inside bar, sell below its low. You can sell the high of this bull bar, betting the reversal up will fail. We have a bigger pullback here. You sell below the bear bar or you take the second entry short below this bear bar. Many, many opportunities to scalp here, each one for 20 pips. However, most traders cannot keep entering and taking profits. They'll end up not entering again often enough and they'll end up missing too many good trades. Here we have a strong bear breakout and a follow through bar below a tight trading range. A reasonable short, maybe on the close of that bar. There's no good reason to get out anywhere through here. Maybe here, the biggest bear breakout late in a bear trend, probably an exhaustive end of the trend. Micro double bottom, a bull bar closing on its high. Reasonable location to take profits, final profits, or maybe here when we're starting to enter a triangle. So a trader selling here and just holding through all of this made a lot of pips, probably a lot more than the scalper who tried to sell, take profits, sell, take profits, sell, take profits. Sometimes traders get a surprisingly quick, big profit. Oftentimes when you're swing trading, the stop is very far from the current price and therefore the risk is very big compared to the remaining reward. When that's the case, you have to be careful about managing your trade. We have a bear swing and a bear flag, yet we get a bull breakout. We have a pullback from that breakout. Probably we're going to get at least a small second leg up. This might end up as a trading range. We might test the top of the range. It's reasonable to buy on a stop above that bear bar, looking for at least a small second leg up. Stop below the bottom of the bear leg if you're taking that buy. And a measured move up from the bottom of the bear trend to the top of this leg up takes you right here. And you can see what happened when the market reached a measured move target. A lot of selling. It's also a breakout above this lower high, the top of the bear swing. And you always have some selling there. You'll have bears exiting with stops. You'll have the bulls who bought here looking at this as a gift, a surprisingly quick, big profit, and they'll take profits at or above a prior high. You'll have other bears who will look at this as a potential trading range. Big down, big up, big confusion, trading range likely. No place limit orders to sell here. So lots of reasons to sell around that prior high. Whenever a trader is buying for a swing and the market quickly reaches a logical target, it's perfectly fine to exit even if it's on the same bar. Is that a swing or a scalp? Well, you got a swing size profit, but in a scalp timeframe, the very same bar in which you entered, you took profits. One of the terrible things that beginners sometimes do is they take a trade for a scalp. It does not go their way. It starts to go against them. And they decide to convert the scalp into a swing. That is a losing strategy. This is a five minute chart of the E-mini. It's really impossible for most traders to scalp repeatedly in a trend. It's okay to look for really great setups and use big volume. And you can theoretically make a living doing that. Most professional traders, even those who scalp most of the time, swing as much as they can because they know that it's very difficult to make money simply scalping alone. You have to swing trade at least part of the time. I have a video in this series on extreme scalping. I talk more about how to scalp repeatedly. If you have a great setup, don't scalp because it's probably going to end up being a swing trade. Great setups do not happen often, but when they do happen, you have to be aware that you have a great setup in front of you. Look at this. We have a bear trend. We have a bull reversal attempt. It failed. We're trying to reverse up again here. Strong enough breakout to the downside. Probably at least a small second leg down. Maybe this is the second leg down, but not a good buy signal bar. So a lot of traders will not buy that. But again, we have another strong reversal up just like we had here. We have another attempt down by the bears and another reversal bar. And this bar is closing on its high. This is a third entry buy. It's a small expanding triangle. Too small to call this a major trend reversal. However, it could be a trading range bottom that could lead to a reversal up. This is a high probability trade for at least a scalp. And if you're taking this for a scalp, it's better to be aware that this could be the end of a leg down, and we could easily test the top of the sell climax. And therefore, if you're looking for a scalp, I would not be too quick to take profits. I would consider swinging at least part of the trade. The math, it's okay for scalping. You buy above the high of this bar, you get filled early on during this big bull trend bar, and you could scalp for two points, risking two points. The probability is high that you'll make your two points. The math is acceptable for a scalp. However, if you're thinking about a possible swing trade, and you do not exit here, you wait for a logical end to the trend. Is this a logical end to the trend? Probably not. What about this? Well, you've got five bars up without a bare body, and you've got a very tight bull channel. Probably the first reversal down will be minor, and we'll get at least a little bit more up. Strong bull breakout here, at least one more leg up. Maybe this is the one more leg up. We're getting near the top of the bear trend. It could be converting into a trading range, big down, big up trading range. This is a reasonable place for traders to exit. If he bought here and he exited here, he took about 10 points profit, and that's better than five two-point scalps. The trader who bought here and took the two-point scalp misunderstood that this could lead to a pretty good reversal up, a swing up, maybe a swing down for a couple hours, swing up for a couple hours. This is a good setup for a swing up, and in general, it's better not to be too quick to take profits and try to swing at least part of your trade. One of the biggest reasons for beginners losing money is that they confuse swing trades with scalp trades. They mix up swing and scalp entries and exit. For example, if you take a swing trade, manage it as a swing trade. Don't scalp. A small expanding triangle, consecutive sell climaxes here, here, here. A good-looking buy signal bar, bull bar closing on its high, bull follow-through bar, bull bar closing on its high. This is a reasonably good swing setup. If you bought thinking, oh wow, what a great possibility for a swing trade. Maybe we'll test here. Maybe we'll test here. Don't scalp for two points profit. If you entered thinking that it was a reasonable swing trade, don't convert it into a scalp. If you're buying this for a swing trade, manage it like a swing trade and you exit up here when the probability of higher prices becomes much less. Another big problem with beginners is they think they're taking a scalp and then they decide to manage it like a swing trade. That is a losing strategy. If you take a trade planning to scalp, rely on a scalp stop and don't pretend it's now a swing trade. Here we have a small pullback after a buy climax. Traders should expect at least a little bit more up, but we're getting near the top of the bear trend. Big down, big up, big confusion. Probably going sideways soon. And look at the number of small doji bars since the market had this first pullback. This looks like a bull leg in a trading range. If you're buying up here, you might be buying pretty close to the top of that range. This is a buy climax, late in a bull trend. Probably going to be an exhaustion gap and the market will probably pull back below the breakout point and below the bottom of the buy climax. Buying up here, low probability bet that you're going to get much higher prices. 3 pushes up, 1, 2, 3. Nested wedge, 1, 2, 3. There are many firms out there that specialize in high frequency trading and they do it using computer algorithms. There are a few traders, very successful profitable scalpers, who manually do high frequency trading. High frequency trading is a type of scalp. If you're looking for a small profit, usually your risk is not all that big. And you need a high probability of success to do it profitably. Computers can take every signal and manage the trades perfectly. For example, these are all reasonable scalps. Small bear flag, sell the close, sell the close, sell the reversal up betting. It'll be either a bull leg in a trading range or a bear flag. Sell the reversal down. Same thing here. A strong bull bar and a tight bear channel. First reversal up will probably fail. We have a sell off, a second close, sell it. Here we have a bear bar after a buy climax. Disappointing bar. Probably will pull back at least a little bit more. The bulls will probably need at least a micro double bottom before they buy. Here we have a second leg up. We're getting fairly high up in the range. We have a breakout above the top of the sell climax. Bears will sell again. Bulls will take profits. Here we have a bull flag, but it's a doji. After a buy climax, low probability buy. Therefore, traders will sell. We have a high two buy, but a bear doji probably at least a little bit more down. We have a bull breakout. A second leg up in a bear bar. Sell the reversal down. Here we have probably a lower high major trend reversal. A weak rally. Small bars probably going at least a little bit more down. All are reasonable scalps. Many buy scalps as well. You buy the reversal up. You buy closes. You buy below that bull bar, betting that the bear reversal will fail. Here we have a micro double top up here, down here, up here. Probably going to get at least a second leg up from this strong rally. So traders will buy that low. They'll buy the bear close. They'll buy above this bar. A high two buy. High one above this bar. High two here. Here we've got a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down. One, two, and then three or four. You have a bull inside bar. A higher high double bottom. You got a bull breakout of the wedge bull flag. You have a pullback. Here you've got a small bull flag. Here you've got a micro double bottom and a higher low. All of these are reasonable scalps. And computers can take all of them. And a really good trader can take all or most of them. But very few traders can do that. And many who can do not want to do it because it's not fun for them. It's very difficult for people to do this profitably and for the long term. Therefore, traders should not be looking for manual high frequency type of scalps. In this video, I talked about how you can enter a trade as a swing, but then as the trade unfolds, you decide it's no longer a valid swing and you could scalp out. When there's a strong breakout, the probability of the market continuing is high and therefore traders can scalp. In any high probability situation, traders can scalp. Finally, if you manage a scalp like a swing, you're going to lose money. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of four videos on swing trading and scalping. From the end of wellness onising you are overallringeга onMaxx. You avoid writing music before your épicTrue dilemma. You perform your old Bliss in your next video and pro terms are in the wüh Meos. It's how great happens. It's a beautiful feature and correct. Which shows that for luck in some research you will see all of in-meow your weaknesses and the examples you see anything Centraliczewoo nuns over here. So we have your하면. Here you have one click here, where new news 걸 thanksgiving and gymsbre tensiology storehouse.