 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on Head and Shoulders patterns. Markets resist change. That means that when the market is in a trading range, breakout attempts usually fail. And when it's in a trend, reversal attempts usually fail. And finally, I'll talk about what happens when you're in a position, you have a logical stop, and your stop is hit. Markets in a bull trend, and we have a Head and Shoulders top. This is an opportunity to remind you that most reversal patterns are trading ranges. And that's because a trend typically continues. The bulls get weaker, the bears get stronger, and there's a transition phase between a bull trend and a bear trend. And that transition phase usually involves some kind of a trading range. Here we have a reversal down, another reversal down, a third reversal down, and it's in a trading range. You can call it a Head and Shoulders top. All Head and Shoulders tops are also triangles. They have three reversals down, and they're in a horizontal pattern. Sometimes they collapse from that third reversal down from the right shoulder, and break strongly below the bottom, and there's no bounce at all. When that happens, it's still basically a triangle that never had a reversal up. The second high is above the first high. The head is above the left shoulder. However, it is still part of the pullback in the bull trend. The bull trend is continuing up here, and at this point, it's still a bull trend. However, this is the start of the transition into a trading range, even though the bull trend is continuing. This is the start of the bear trend, even though the bull trend might still be continuing here. Bull trends, bear trends, there's usually some transition in between when there are elements of both the bull trend and the bear trend. So, a bear trend often begins before a bull trend ends. A trading range often begins before a bull trend ends. Here, we're still in the bull trend, but this high is part of a trading range, or a triangle. The traditional way to trade a head and shoulders top is to enter on a stop below the neckline. The neckline is either a line drawn from the pullback after the left shoulder and the head, or it's simply a stop order just below either this low, the pullback from the head, or the pullback from the left shoulder. Because a head and shoulders top is a trading range, most breakouts fail, and therefore, if you sell on a stop below the bottom of the range, below the neckline, you're going to lose money most of the time. However, the potential reward is much bigger than the risk, and that more than offsets the low probability. Most major reversal patterns, including head and shoulders tops, have about a 40% chance of leading to a swing trade, a 60% chance of either continuing sideways or up. This is expected. It's a bear breakout below a trading range, the markets resist change, the markets, when they're in a trading range, tend to stay in trading ranges, and breakout attempts below or above usually fail. When you have a head and shoulders top, and the market starts to reverse down from the right shoulder, if that reversal down is very big and very fast, there's a higher probability that it will lead to a successful breakout below the neckline, and a measured move down. That's not the case here. This is a pair of pretty good bear bars, but these three are in a tight trading range, inside of a bigger tight trading range, tail on the bottom, tail on the bottom, bad follow through. Instead of selling at the bottom of the range on the breakout, betting the breakout will be successful, it's usually better mathematically to look at the resumption of the bull trend, and sell on a reversal down, betting that the market will test the bottom of the range. Remember, at this point we've had reversals down and up, and we've been sideways for 40 bars, we're in our trading range. Buy low, sell high. We're high, you should sell, in the top half of the range, or a reversal down from the top half of the range. Selling on a breakout below the bottom of the range is a low probability bet, because most trading range breakouts fail. If you're looking to short, once the market has a possible left shoulder, a possible head, and then a rally, it's usually better to short on the reversal down from that rally, the right shoulder, than it is to sell on a breakout below the bottom of the range. You have a better chance of making money. I mentioned that there are different ways to draw the neckline of a head and shoulders top. For example, you can use the low from the pullback from the head. That's the most recent higher low in a bull trend, at least in this particular case it is. Sometimes this low is below that low. But right here, it's the most recent higher low in a bull trend. The reversal up is not all that strong. So in this particular case, this is not really a major higher low. If we had a very strong reversal up here, then this becomes major. And if the market falls below it, the bull trend has ended, and the market has either entered a trading range or a bear trend. We're clearly already in a trading range. However, if this was a major higher low, and we had a strong sell-off below it, it would increase the chances that we would convert into a bear trend. Some traders enter on the breakout below this pullback. This pullback. This is the low of the entire trading range. Sometimes this low from the head is the low. Here, in this particular case, the pullback from the left shoulder is the low of the entire trading range. Some traders prefer to enter not simply on the breakout below the higher of the two lows. They tend to enter on the lower of the two lows, thinking that there might be a slightly higher probability of a successful breakout if the market breaks below all of the bars. The traditional way to draw the neckline is to use a line connecting the two lows. Sometimes this low from the head is above the low from the left shoulder, and you have a rising line. Other times the pullback from the head is below, and you have a slightly declining line. Usually this low and that low are fairly close together. The bulls see a double bottom bull flag. The rally from the double bottom failed. It did not get above the high of the trend, and that confuses traders, and it makes traders wonder if, instead of bull trend resumption, we might get trend reversal down. The three choices for lines for the neckline are usually close together, and the entry prices from the three possibilities are usually very close together, and it does not matter which one you take. If you're looking to sell on the break up below the neckline, it doesn't matter which one you use. We're in a bull trend. Even with the sell-off, it might be a high two bull flag. Leg one pull back leg two. It might be a double bottom bull flag, and the bull trend could continue up. Trends, like trading ranges, resist change. A trend tends to continue despite many attempts to reverse, and therefore, if you're looking to trade a reversal, you often have to take several attempts. Let's say a trader sold on a breakout below that low or this low. They get filled here or somewhere in here, and then they see this doji bar. Some traders will exit, arguing a wedge leg down, three pushes down, one, two, and then three, and then the market's reversing up at the bottom of a trading range. Other traders will get out above this bull bar. In any case, if a trader enters with a stop on the breakout below this range, and we reverse up, especially if we reverse up above a bull bar, most traders would get out. If they sold here or here, they'd make a small profit. If they sold here, they'd have a small loss. The bull trend is resuming. Theoretically, the stop for the bears is above the right shoulder. Some bears would hold short, even with this reversal up, and exit with the stop above the right shoulder. I usually do not do that. If there's a decent reversal up at the bottom of the range, I'll get out either here or here. The market has a very strong breakout. It's probably going to have at least a small second leg up, and it did here. Now we're breaking above the top of the trading range. What do you think is going to happen? We're in trading range. Most breakouts fail, and this is a second entry short on the breakout above the top of the range. First entry short, second entry short. Decent bear bar. It's a reasonable short. It's no longer a head and shoulders top, but it is a consecutive tops pattern. We had a top attempt here, a head and shoulders top, and now we have a second top. We have a second entry short failed breakout above the trading range. Also, it's an expanding triangle top. We have a high, we have a higher high, and we have a third higher high. We have a low, we have a lower low. An expanding triangle top. It's also a type of higher high major trend reversal. We have a bull trend, a bear breakout, and then trend resumption up to a higher high, and the trend resumption up failed twice. That's an expanding triangle top, and a reasonable short. If you want, you could simply call it a wedge, and say three pushes up, one, two, three, even though it's not a wedge shape. Bears sell on the reversal down. We're starting to go down. We have about six or seven bars without a bull body. The bulls try to reverse up, and then we have a very big bear bar reversing down. Some traders will sell below this low, thinking that this is good enough selling pressure for at least a small second leg down, and they'll look to sell below a bear bar. They get filled here. Consecutive bear bars probably going to have a swing down. Bears now have their stop above here, and because a swing down is likely, if they see a reversal up, they're going to look to sell below a bear bar for a resumption of the bear trend, a lower high. Remember, their stop is here, above this strong bear breakout. They'll bet that the reversal up will become a bear flag, and that the bear trend will continue down. We have a bull trend, and now we're in a trading range. And once a bull trend has a pullback that grows to 20 or more bars, I call it a trading range, and at that point, the probability of trend resumption up falls to about the same as the probability of trend reversal down. In general, even if the trading range has 20 or 30 bars, it's slightly more likely to resume up than reverse down, but the probability is very close to 50-50. We tried to reverse down here and again here. It failed. We tried to resume up. That failed. We tried to reverse down again, and it was successful at this point. A bear breakout and a follow-through bar, possibly a measuring gap for a measured move down based upon the height of the trading range. Bull trend, a pullback. A bull flag. The bull trend will probably resume. It resumed, but you have a deep sell-off here. Some traders would see this as a higher high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout, higher high, reversal down with five consecutive bear bars. That's enough selling so that we have big up, big down. That means big confusion. Confusion usually means sideways. Traders are confident the market probably will not go down very far before the bulls buy again at the prior low. And after five consecutive bear bars, they're confident that the first reversal up will probably fail and will have to test down again. The bulls were disappointed by the extent of this sell-off. The bears were disappointed by the extent of this rally. Confusion and disappointment at this point, hallmark of a trading range. Probably this is a trading range. Most attempts to break to the upside will fail, like here, here, or here. And most attempts to break to the downside will probably fail, like here or here. Traders look to buy low and sell high. Whenever the market's in a trading range, there are always reasonable reasons to buy and reasonable reasons to sell. For example, here we're 30 bars into a trading range. The bulls see a double bottom bull flag. The bears see a higher high and a lower high major trend reversal and a head and shoulders top. We're trying to break below the bottom of the range. The bulls see a big high two. Leg one, pull back leg two. They see a double bottom bull flag. They see a bigger double bottom bull flag. Double bottom bull flag. You can take any of these trades. The probability is about 40% that you'll get a swing trade. By a swing trade, I mean a reward at least equal to twice the risk. And usually having at least two legs and at least 10 bars. 60% chance you will not get a swing trade. 60% chance the market will either continue sideways or go the opposite direction. Now, we have a head, a left shoulder, and we're breaking below the neckline. This is a double bottom. It's a double bottom bull flag. And we have a break below the double bottom bull flag. We therefore have three pushes down. One, two, and three. This functionally is the same as a wedge bull flag. It doesn't matter that it does not have a wedge shape. It's three attempts down. Traders will look to buy a reversal up. Any time the market tries to do something three times and fails, traders expect it to do the opposite. Likewise, this is a wedge top. One, two, three. Because it does not have a wedge shape, I typically do not refer to this as a wedge top. I typically do not refer to this as a wedge bottom. But both are variations of wedges because the forces are the same. The market tried to do something three times and reversed. Here the market tried to rally three times and traders expect it to fail and it will look to sell a reversal down. Three attempts down. Horizontal, you can call it a failed breakout below a trading range. A failed breakout below a double bottom. You can call it a high two bull flag. You can even call it a wedge. The forces are all the same. It's a failed breakout below the range. Traders either buy on a stop above this doji bar. Or they look to buy above a bull bar. Buying above this bull bar has higher probability. And look what happened when it went above that bull bar. We have a very big bull bar. And that tells you that lots of traders bought above this bull bar. The bears bought back their shorts. And the bulls bought expecting a resumption of the bull trend. What happens when a stop is hit? We have a bull trend. Head and shoulders top. Some bears will sell a reversal down from this rally. Betting that it will be a right shoulder of a head and shoulders top. Other bears will sell a pullback. We have big up, big down, a double bottom. They are expecting the bear breakout. They will sell below this bar. Others will sell at that low, this low, or that low on a stop. Betting that they have a chance of a measured move down. Some bulls, if they buy this reversal up, a pretty strong reversal, they will put a stop below this low. And they get stopped out here. So you have bears stopping themselves into shorts below that low. And you have bulls stopping out of longs if the market falls below that low. The bears who sell here, we have four decent bear bars. And now we have a big bear breakout bar. Some bears will exit on a stop above this bear bar. Others will exit on a stop above the right shoulder of the head and shoulders top. A bear trend needs lower lows and lower highs. If the market has a major lower high, a lower high that has a strong breakout, especially if it goes to a new low, the bears place their stops above that lower high. Because if it gets above that high, their premise of a series of lower highs and lower lows is no longer valid. Their premise of a bear trend is no longer valid. Once the market gets above this major lower high, the market's either in a trading range or a bull trend. It's no longer in a bear trend. Breaking above the top of this major lower high, it's now either a bull trend or a trading range. Bulls buy, expecting trend resumption up. They have a bull trend. They see this as a two-legged pullback. One, pullback two. A high two bull flag. They also see it as a failed breakout below a head and shoulders top, especially once it gets above that right shoulder. They know the bears will give up there. Maybe leg one, pullback, leg two. And the bears buy as well. They get out of their shorts because their premise of a bear trend is no longer valid. In general, whenever any protective stop is hit, there's a 50% chance that you'll get a swing in the direction of the breakout. And a 50% chance you'll get a reversal. The bears who sell here, 50% chance you're going to get a swing down. 50% chance you'll get a reversal up. The bulls who buy here, 50% chance you'll get a swing up. 50% chance you'll get a swing down. Here, the bears saw a reversal up. Here, the bulls saw an attempt at a reversal down, but it became a bull flag and we got the swing up. Opposite things happened here. Here, the stop for the bulls was hit, yet the bull trend resumed. Here, the stop for the bear trend was hit, but the market reversed into a bull trend. Four consecutive bull bars closing on their highs. Big bull body here, decent bull bar here. This is a very strong breakout above this high. The probability is more than 50% for the bulls when you have a breakout that looks this strong. Remember I said in general, if a stop is hit, 50% chance you'll get a swing up. 50% chance you'll get a reversal down. I adjust that probability depending on market conditions. Here, this is an especially strong breakout with good follow through. The odds are more than 50% that we're going to get a measured move up. Probably about 60% that we're going to get a measured move up. What about here? We have a very strong bear bar. Is this more than 50% chance of a successful breakout? No, I want to see a bear bar and a follow through bar. When I only see the bear bar, 50% chance it's going to fail. 50% chance you'll get the swing down. And look at the follow through bar. It's a reversal. To me, the bear breakout is failing, especially if the market gets above the high of this bull bar, which it did right here. Very strong leg up. Chances are, the first reversal down, bulls and bears will buy, and there'll be at least one more leg up. The bulls buy because some bulls did not buy until after they saw the breakout, and then once they saw the breakout, they had to get long. And they look for a pullback. They'll buy above the bull bar and get long. Some bears held and sold more at this high. And once we've had this breakout, they look at this and say, well, that's really too strong. I cannot be short. And they wait for any kind of a reversal down, and then they buy back their shorts. They're hoping to get out with a slightly smaller loss. So they look for the pullback, and then they buy. And the result is the bears are buying to exit, and the bulls are buying, expecting a measure move up. And you get a strong breakout. Whenever a head and shoulders top is forming, the bears see a reversal pattern, a head and shoulders top. And the bulls see a trading range. They hope it's a bull flag. They can call it a triangle, as I said. They can call it a wedge bull flag. They can call it two legs down to a high two bull flag. It doesn't matter. The bulls see a bull flag. Again, we reverse down. We reverse down a second time. We reverse down a third time. That's three pushes down, and that's a wedge, even though it does not have a wedge shape. If this whole pattern was tilted down a little bit more, if this low was a little bit lower, then traders would say, oh, it's clearly a wedge bull flag. However, it does not matter. The forces are the same. The shape may not be perfect, but the forces are the same. It's a wedge bull flag. Also remember, the market tends to transition. It does not go from bull trend to bear trend. It usually has to go from bull trend to trading range. And the beginning of a bear trend often comes before the end of the bull trend. The beginning of a trading range often comes before the end of the bull trend. You can draw it like this and call it a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down. This low slightly below that low. This low further below. And then we have a strong reversal up from the break up below the wedge bull flag. Some bulls will buy above this bar. They see the strong reversal up from the break up below the bottom. And they see this as a pullback from this reversal up. It's also about a 50% pullback. We pull back about 50% and now we're starting to resume up. They'll place a stop to buy above the high of the prior bar. Other bulls will buy above the high of this bar or above the high of the two bar reversal. This is interesting. This big bull bar is a buy signal bar. Some bulls look at this and say, Well, we've been sideways for 6 or 7 bars. We've been sideways here for 20 bars. And therefore, the chance of a successful breakout above the high of that bar is less. In addition, if I buy above the high of this bar, my stop is very far away. So my risk is greater. Therefore, it's a low probability buy with big risk, probably sellers above the high of this bar. Some bulls will not look to buy above the high of this bar. Instead, they'll look to buy a pullback looking for a resumption up. For example, they'll look to buy with a limit order 50% down or above the high of the prior bar once the market pulled back about 50%. We have a bear trend, and we have a potential left shoulder, head, and a potential right shoulder. And the right shoulder is subdivided into a smaller head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Bulls will buy a resumption up here. A buy resumption up here. Taking a chance that we're going to get a trend reversal. At this point, we've been sideways for about 40 or 50 bars. Close to a 50% chance that we'll get a trend reversal up versus 50% chance trend resumption down. Decent buying pressure here, but not much buying pressure here. I think there's probably greater than a 50% chance that we'll get trend resumption down. But it's fairly close to 50% chance that the bulls will get an attempt at a trend reversal up. It's a reasonable buy, either above this bull bar or above that bar or above this bull bar. A nested head and shoulders bottom. 40% chance you're going to get a swing up. 60% chance you will not. 60% chance you either continue sideways or the bear trend will resume down. 60% chance you're going to get a strong traders. Traders who took this buy, they're buying in a tight trading range. They'll put a stop below the low and they'll get out here. Whenever you have a reasonable stop and the stop gets hit, 50% chance the market will continue down. 50% chance it will reverse up again. Bears sell, expecting the market is resuming down. Strong enough down, the bulls will probably not buy above this bull bar. They'll wait for a second attempt to reverse up, for example here or here. The bulls who bought here or here were expecting a higher low, and then a series of higher lows and higher highs. They're expecting a bull trend. If the market falls below a significant higher low, then their premise is no longer valid. Then the market's either still in a trading range, or the bear trend is resuming, and therefore their premise of a bull trend is wrong, and they get out below a significant higher low, like here. Here we have a pretty good reversal up, we have a higher low here. A lot of the bulls will give up either below here or here. When a stop is hit, 50% probability for the bulls and the bears. 50% chance the bear breakout will fail, and you'll get a reversal up. Remember, this is a breakout below a small trading range, and it's an attempt to break out below a big trading range. 50% chance the breakout will be successful for the bears, and they'll get a measured move down. The bear trend is down, and the bear trend is down. Head and shoulders bottom, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Head and shoulders bottom are also triangles. There are three pushes up. From the left shoulder, from the head, from the right shoulder. It's a breakout mode pattern, and here we're getting a bear breakout, four consecutive bear bars. The bears see it as a triangle and a bear trend, and they're expecting trend resumption down. However, a triangle and a bear trend often becomes the final bear flag. If the bears do get their breakout, traders will look to buy a reversal up, expecting the market to come back to the apex of that triangle. Very tight bear channel, strong reversal up. Because it's a very tight bear channel, the first reversal up is probably minor, and it probably will lead either to a bear flag and a resumption of the bear trend, or a trading range, as it did here. Big down, big up, big confusion, sideways likely. However, a lot of bulls will buy this second reversal up, thinking that we have a tight trading range here, a magnet. We have a strong reversal up, and now we have a second entry buy. This is a type of a double bottom. It's a slightly higher low. It's probably a minor reversal, because the pattern does not have many bars. We rallied only three bars. We sold off only three bars. It's probably a minor reversal into a trading range. However, the context is good for a move back up to this tight trading range, maybe to the top of the tight trading range. And therefore, it's a reasonable buy. Higher probability, buy after you see the breakout. There's a little bit of a trend that's going to be a big bullbar. So, traders are suspecting that reversal is underway, and now we have a very big bullbar, probably at least a small second leg up here or here. It's a high probability bet that the market could go at least a little higher, maybe to the top of the triangle. In this video, I made the point that markets resist change. The trading range are constantly trying to reverse, and the trend usually continues. The trading ranges are constantly trying to break out, yet the breakouts typically fail. Head and shoulders tops, head and shoulders bottoms, they are trading ranges, and therefore, they are not high probability breakout setups. Yet, 40% of the time, you get a swing trade, and that more than offsets the low probability. I also have talked about what happens when a stop is hit. If you are in a trade, and you have a logical location for the stop, and the stop gets hit, 50% chance when the stop gets hit, you're in the start of an opposite trend. 50% chance the market will again reverse in your original direction. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks. This is the second of two videos on Head and Shoulders patterns. Thank you for watching The Brooks Trading Course.