 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. In this video, I'm going to be talking about measured moves. I am going to begin talking about measured moves based upon the height of a trading range. I will then talk about measured moves based upon the height of a breakout. Trading range, probable breakout up or down, and then a measured move up or down. The measured move is the market going as far as it did when it was doing something before. It was doing this before. So a measured move means that I'm looking for a move after leaving that trading range. I'm looking for a move about that same height. Remember the market cycle. It alternates between trend and trading range. When the market's in a trading range, I'm looking for a measured move and a trend based upon the height of the trading range. Breakout bar, strong follow through, probable measuring gap. Probably we'll get a measured move up based upon what took place before. Bottom of the range, top of the range. And you can see a lot of computers calculated that target and had limit orders waiting to take profits there. And bear computers were selling for scalps. Remember, a trading range here, here, here. It's an area of agreement. And people tend to agree in the middle. So whenever the market goes up and then sideways, maybe this is the middle of the move. And therefore, the middle of the range often is the middle of a move. So the market goes up sideways in the middle of that trading range often is the middle of the final move. Bull break out and then an area of agreement. Here's the middle of agreement. So maybe it'll go up as far as it was down before the trading range began. So a lot of times if you see a bull trend and a trading range, you look at the middle of the trading range and project up for a measured move. Because there will be some bulls taking profits there and some bears selling there. Bull trend, trading range, area of agreement. People agree in the middle. So maybe this is the middle of a move up. Middle of the range. And you can see we get vacuumed up in a strong bull breakout. But as soon as we got there, traders sold. Bulls sold to take profits. Bears sold to go short. Sell-off in a trading range. Area of agreement. So possibly the middle of the move. Leg one down to the middle of the range. And then leg two. Bulls start to buy for scalps. Bears start to take profits. In general, this type of measured move is minor. Most computers do not pay attention to it. Traders are more interested in the other types of measured moves that I talked about. Like based upon the height of the trading range or leg one, leg two measured move. Leg one, pull back leg two. Leg one, pull back leg two. Leg one, trading range, leg two. Leg one, pull back. Leg one, pull back. Leg two, pull back. And then let's go back. Leg two, pull back. Leg two, pull back. And then you can see the bull trend. And then you can see the bull trend. Well, if you remember what I said earlier, a lot of times, if you have a bull trend and a trading range, computers will assume that leg one ended when the trading range began. So leg one, here's the end of leg one. Leg one, trading range, does not matter that we're higher. The trading range began here. So leg one, and then the start of a trading range. And then leg two, when we're starting to break out to the downside. I also said that computers use the height of a trading range for measured move projections. So the trading range, measured move up. Trading range, maybe measured move up. Trading range, maybe measured move down. So you can see we did go for measured move up here and again here, but not to the measured move down there. When there's a breakout, sometimes the height of the breakout itself can lead to a measured move. When a market has a breakout, traders assume that there's going to be a second leg up that will be based upon the initial breakout. I talked about a leg one, leg two measured move. The second leg up about the same size as the first. I talked about a measured move based upon the height of a trading range. But the market also has a measured move based upon the height of the breakout. So bull breakout, I look at the open of the bull body and the close of the bull body. Maybe we'll go up for a measured move. Bulls take profits and aggressive bears sell. Strong bull breakout, maybe we'll get a measured move up. 40% of the time, if you're going to get a measured move from a strong breakout, it'll be in the opposite direction. We'll get a measured move. Strong breakout. Strong breakout began here. Top of the breakout, maybe the highest close, who knows. Different computers do different things. Maybe they'll start the measured move from here up to there. In any case, whenever I see a strong breakout, I'm looking for a measured move and 60% chance, if there's going to be one, it'll be up. 40% chance, it'll break below the bottom of the bull leg there or here or here and then fall for a measured move down. So once you start to see a pretty strong bear reversal and two, three or four consecutive bear bars, you've got to be thinking that the first target is the bottom of the bull breakout and then possibly a measured move down. I look to see what happens at the bottom of the breakout. Is the market bouncing or is it continuing down? And you can see, well, we're continuing to get bear bars. So it looks like instead of reversing up at support, the bottom of the buy climax or the bottom of the bull trend, it looks like we're continuing down. I'm starting to look at measured move projections to the downside. When the market gets there, especially if the bear trend is weakening like this, bulls will buy for scalps, like below that low, and bears will begin to take profits. Opposite situation, strong bull breakout, so maybe a measured move up based upon the open of the first bar to the close of the second bar. So whenever I see this, 60% chance we're going to get a measured move up. 40% chance we'll refer us down and get a measured move down. But the math is very good for buying. Traders will buy that close. 60%, maybe 70% chance when the breakout is this strong that we'll go up for some kind of a measured move. Open of the bar, close of the bar at the end of the breakout. Here's the two bar breakout. And there's the measured move target. And you can see bulls took profits and bears shorted. In general, especially when the rally is weakening like this, traders should take full or partial profits at an obvious resistance level like a measured move target. Opposite true with a bear breakout. Very strong bear breakout. Bad follow through, but very strong bear breakout. So possible measured move based upon the height of the breakout bar. 60% chance the measured move will be down. With this bad follow through, you've got to be thinking it could also be up. Break above the high of the cell climax and travel up for a measured move. We tried to break above the top of the cell climax here. Tried again here and we failed. The bulls see a head and shoulders bottom. And the bears see a double top or a triangle. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Breakout mode. Bulls will buy on a stop above the double top or above the triangle. And bears will sell on a stop below the right shoulder of the head and shoulders bottom. Right below the low of the higher low. Here we have a bear breakout. But look what we got. We got around a measured move up based upon the height of that bear body. Bulls buy on a stop above this bar, that bar, or here. Hoping to get the measured move up which they got. The height of the bear body. Measured move up based upon that height. And look what took place at that measured move target. We reverse down strongly. And that tells you that Bulls took profits and bears sold up there. Bear is also sold. Expecting at least a pullback big enough for a scalp. Hoping for either a swing down or a trading range. Again, there are often many choices. Strong bull breakout. And a reversal all the way down to the bottom of the bull breakout. The buy climax. Are we going to get a double bottom and resumption up? Or are we going to break below the double bottom and fall for a measured move down? Once the market breaks below the bottom of a strong bull breakout like that, 50% chance we're going to fall for a measured move based upon the height of the breakout. And 50% chance we will not. That will stay sideways or maybe go up. The first target I would look at for the bear case is a measured move based upon the height of those two bodies. The bull breakout. Open of the first bar to the close of the second bar. And this is the measured move down. And the bears ignored it, so we're probably going at least a little bit lower. You can see, instead of finding buyers at the measured move, we broke out and had follow through. When that happens, traders will then look for the next downside target. Bulls tried to get a double bottom. Here's the neckline. They wanted a measured move up above the neckline. Instead, we got a bear breakout below the double bottom. In which case, I'm looking for a measured move down. This is a pretty strong bear leg. It's probably not the end of the move. Also, a very tight bear channel. Any reversal up is minor, which means that after 5 or 10 bars, we'll probably test back down. And then try to get a major trend reversal, like a lower low major trend reversal. Wedge bottom. One, two, three. So instead of looking at simply the height of the bull breakout, maybe the market is looking at the height of the entire bull trend. Bulls wanted a double bottom. Did not get it. When you get a strong rally, and then a test back down to the low, if it keeps going down, to me, that's a failed attempt at a double bottom. Instead of a measured move up, I'm going to look for a measured move down. Measure move projection is down here. Did not reach there. Bare breakout here. Tried to find a base here. We got a bare breakout, so probably at least a little bit more down. And here we got our measured move down. From that high to this low, or in the middle of the gap. That low, this high. And bears took profits, and bulls bought. Also a possible lower low major trend reversal. Bear trend. Wedge bear flag. And then a weak rally to a wedge bottom. One, two, three. Bulls will be looking to buy a reversal up. Some will start buying on that bear close, betting that the next bear breakout will fail. Remember, every bull trend ends at resistance. Every bear trend ends at support. And there are often many possible support or resistance levels. And I'm looking for a confluence of resistance or support. Here in a bear trend, I'm looking for a confluence of support. And the more things that are creating support here, the more likely the bear trend will end here. And we might get a bull trend. We might get a trading range. We might get a bull trend. As I said, lower low major trend reversal. Wedge bottom. One, two, three. Bulls will start buying. Either bear closes or above that bar, bull closes. Any reason below this bar. Looking for at least two legs up. Up to where? Up to measure move targets. Lower low major trend reversal. Wedge bottom. In this video, I talked about measured moves based upon the height of a trading range. There's usually a breakout that pauses around the measured move target. I next talk about breakouts leading to measured moves. And once they reach their target, they usually get at least enough profit taking to cause a small trading range. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on measured moves. Here's take... Push your screen louise. How do? Mix the camera over? Exactly. Push. You feel slightly louder. You hecho with that stick? Check it out afterwards, guys. Choose your stress style. Welcome to and welcome you to the field. Push to the master becamegies. Get along theiksi programs. In the smaller doubleurrection is titled there.