 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the third of five videos on climaxes. I want to begin by talking about what I mean when I refer to something as a climactic reversal. And then climaxes often do not lead to trend reversals. They can become measuring gaps. I want to distinguish exhaustion gaps from measuring gaps. A lot of times you'll hear people on television talk about climaxes and you immediately assume that a climax is going to lead to a reversal. In fact, most climaxes do not lead to reversals. For example, here we have a buy climax and now we have a climactic reversal, but it only led to a 50% pullback and the bull trend resumed. You don't know that you have a climax until there is a reversal. And once the reversal begins, traders refer to it as a climactic reversal. When you get a climactic reversal, here a big sell-off and a big reversal up, they're often scary. And the climax looks like it's going to lead to a trend in the opposite direction. But that is the exception. Most of the time, the market ends up going sideways. Most climaxes are simply sharp legs in trading ranges. We have a climactic reversal up and then a trading range. We have a small buy climax and then a reversal down. Climactic reversal down and then a reversal up. And the market went sideways. Here we have a very strong sell-off, yet it reversed up dramatically. So this is a sell climax that led to a climactic reversal. And it was simply a leg in a trading range. It tested the bottom of the trading range and then the trading range continued. Here we have a buy climax and then the market reversed down. So we have a buy climax and now we have a climactic reversal. This is a climactic reversal all the way down to here. Yet, did it lead to a bear trend? No. It simply led to a sideways market. Climactic reversal down and then a trading range. So we reverse down and then a trading range. Climactic reversal down and then sideways. We went up and then we have a climactic reversal down and sideways. Climactic reversal down and sideways. Just like climactic reversal up, sideways, up, sideways, and then up and sideways. Climactic reversal up, sideways, up, sideways, and then up and sideways. Climactic reversal A climax can be a single very big bar, or it could be a series of smaller bars, sometimes ten or more bars. When I use the term climax, I'm referring to a breakout that occurs late in a trend after twenty or more bars. Sometimes you get a single climax, as we have here, and other times you get a series of climaxes, like here, pull back here, pull back here. When you see something like this, a single big bar that reverses immediately, it's often news related. Not always, but often news related. And it's usually simply a test of support or resistance. And that's what this was. A very strong sell off, but simply a test of the bottom of a trading range. Every trend bar is a climax. Every trend bar is a breakout. This is a bear breakout attempt. And it's a sell climax. Yet, it immediately reversed up, and therefore you get a climactic reversal. It's a single big bear trend bar. Here we have a big bull bar. Every bull bar is a breakout and a climax. This is a breakout above this triangle or trading range. And now we have a series of three or four consecutive bull bars. This is also a climax. Here are two consecutive bull bars closing on their highs. That's also a climax. This is a series of buy climaxes. And this is a single buy climax with four consecutive big bull trend bars closing above their midpoints. Look at this. We have six or seven consecutive bull bars. None of them is very big. However, on a higher timeframe chart, they are maybe one or two big trend bars on that higher timeframe chart. A micro channel is unsustainable. The market cannot keep doing that forever. Eventually, you'll get a pullback. A micro channel or anything that's unsustainable is climactic. That does not mean the market reverses. It just means it cannot continue to do that forever. Here's another bull micro channel. Climactic. The market had to pause. Seven bar bull micro channel. Late in a bull trend. 20 or more bars into the trend. This is 50 bars into the bull trend. You have to be thinking that any kind of a buy climax late in the trend can be an exhaustive end of the trend. A buy climax that can lead to a reversal. Buy climax, buy climax, buy climax, buy climax. And on a higher timeframe chart, this could be a single bar or two bars. This could be two or three bars. Every series of bull trend bars, every bull micro channel is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Here we have 20 bars in a very tight bare channel. There are pullbacks along the way, so it's not a micro channel, but it's still a very tight channel. On a higher timeframe chart, this is simply a breakout. It might be one or two consecutive big bull bear trend bars. When it occurs late in a bear trend, it could be a climactic end of the trend. A sell climax. Once the market reverses up, then you get a climactic reversal. Usually, you end up going sideways. Sometimes, you get an opposite trend. Most trends end with a breakout. Most trends begin with a breakout. When a breakout fails at the start of the trend, I call it a failed breakout, not a climax or a climactic reversal, even though every breakout is a climax. The market's in a bear trend, lasting about 50 bars, and now we get a very strong bull breakout. Do I want to call that a climactic end of a bull trend? No, it's the start of a bull trend. I would refer to this as a failed breakout. We have a bear trend and a bull breakout above the bear trend line, and the market just stops. The rally just stops. If you want, you can call it a buy climax. It is. Every trend bar or series of trend bars is a breakout and a climax. Usually, I would describe this as a breakout, and then once I see this, I would say it's a failed breakout. The market is in a broad bear channel. It's forming lower highs and lower lows. This is simply a failed reversal up within a broad bear channel. Although at this point, you don't know that. Once you're down here, you look back and say, huh, that was just a bull leg and a bear channel. If you want to call it a climax, you can find a climax on a smaller timeframe chart. This on a smaller timeframe chart might be 10 bars, and it might have a small final flag. You can call it a climax because then if it has 10 or 20 bars on a smaller timeframe chart, you have a trend. A trend lasting 10 or 20 bars. If it reverses, you would refer to this as a biclimax and this as the climactic reversal. Very strong bull breakout. In fact, a series of biclimaxes. A biclimax here for two bars, and then another biclimax here, or a biclimax lasting four bars. It's a strong bull breakout on a five minute chart. We're breaking above the bear channel. However, on a higher timeframe chart, like a 30 minute chart, it could simply be a failed breakout. Here's that same chart, 30 minute chart. This green box is this green box. All of these bars on the five minute chart create just two bars on the 30 minute chart and the market center bear trend. This is simply a failed breakout attempt, an attempt to break above the bull channel, and it failed, and it led to a resumption of the bear trend. A very strong breakout probably will lead to a measured move. My first thought always is the open of the first bar of the biclimax to the close of the second bar of the biclimax. 60% chance we'll get a measured move up, which we did. And you can see the market stalling here, in part because of bulls taking profits. It's also a parabolic wedge top. First push, pull back, and maybe second push here, and then a pull back, and a third push. On a small timeframe chart, all these tails on the tops of bars represent a wedge, a parabolic wedge, on a smaller timeframe chart. Trends usually begin with a breakout. Sometimes it's small, sometimes it's big. Here we have a couple bear bars leading to a bear trend. We have a reversal up, and then we have a pair of bull bars here. The bears are giving up. The bulls are becoming more confident. Do I want to call this a climax? Well, every trend bar, every series of trend bars is a climax. This is a biclimax. That is a cell climax. It did not lead to a reversal. In fact, it led to the start of a bear trend. This led to a brief reversal. So this is a climactic reversal. However, it was simply a pullback from this breakout, and the bull trend resumed. Trends often end with a breakout. For example, we have a cell climax here, a breakout, a cell climax here, and then another one here. This is an exhaustive cell climax. We reversed up. The gap closed. The gap between this close and this low, that low. It closed with this reversal. And this big bear trend bar was the end of the bear trend. Here we have a big bull trend bar. In fact, it's the biggest bull trend bar of the entire trend. Yet, this breakout led to a climactic reversal and an end of the bull trend. The market entered a trading range. A bear breakout that did not become a cell climactic end of the trend. It became a breakout that led to another leg down. Just because you have a climax, a breakout, a big trend bar, does not mean the trend will end. Sometimes it can lead to the beginning of a new swing down. Here we have a cell climax, a pair of bear bars, maybe a third push down. One, two, three. And we have a reversal up. This is an exhaustive end of the trend. Yet, it did not lead to a bull trend. It simply led to a pause in the trend. The market rallied above the top of the cell climax, formed a double top with that high or this high. And then the bear trend resumed. It became a one bar buy climax. And in this case, it was simply a bear flag. I think it's important to pay attention to gaps. Often they are exhaustion gaps. Other times they are measuring gaps. The biggest bull trend bar in a trend that has lasted 30 or 40 bars. You have to be thinking that it's a buy climax. And it is. Will it lead to a reversal in the end of the trend? Or will traders look at this and say, it's a weak rally. It's a bear flag. This might be a bull breakout of the bear flag. And maybe the trend is going to get stronger. The trend is not strong here. Where are the consecutive bull trend bars? This looks like a bull leg in a trading range. Is this an exhaustive end of this trend? Or is it this bull leg in what could be a trading range converting into a bull trend? Will this be the start of a bull trend? Or is it the end of this weak rally? We have a gap. The close of this bar and the high of the breakout point. There's a gap there. Will that gap close? Will we reverse down and fall below this high, that high, and even this low? Will this be an exhaustion gap? The gap between here and here. Or instead, will any pullback fail to break below these highs and the gap stays open? In which case, it could be a measuring gap leading to a measured move up. From this low to this high. And then from the pullback up there. At this point, we do not know if that gap will be a measuring gap leading to a bull trend. Or an exhaustion gap leading to a reversal down. More than 20 bars into a bull trend. Maybe 30 or 40 bars. It's the biggest bull trend bar. It doesn't have to be the biggest. If it's simply one of the biggest, that is all that you need to have an increased risk of a bi-climax and the end of the bull trend. However, this rally is weak. And instead of this being a climactic end of this bull trend, it could be a conversion from a weak rally into a strong bull trend. And that's what it was in this case. We have a reversal attempt. So, we have a climactic reversal here. Yet, this low, this low, did not fall below the breakout point. And once you get this bull bar and the resumption of the bull trend, traders are beginning to think that this gap. Now, instead of a gap between this close and that high, it's a gap between the low of the pullback, the low of the bull flag, and that high. At this point, traders are thinking that it's probably going to be a measuring gap and that we're probably going to rally for a measured move up. Big bull trend bar. It's a breakout and a bi-climax. Weak follow through for a couple bars. The betas are trying to get a climactic reversal and they want to close the gap. They want to get down to the bottom of the bi-climax and then maybe fall for a measured move below that. The reversal down did not close the gap. It did not fall below the breakout point. Now, we're getting breakouts here and here. That increases the chances that this gap will lead to a measured move up. The bottom of the bull trend. The top of the weak rally. And we're getting a bull breakout above a weak rally. It could be an exhaustive end of the trend. But once we start to go up here and here, it becomes more likely that this gap is going to lead to a measured move up. That's the measured move. And look what happened. The market got very close to that line and then paused. That means a lot of bulls were looking to take profits at a measured move up. And bear scalpers will sell there as well. Especially since we're getting bad follow through here. Tail here, tail here. Tail here. Bears are starting to sell above bars. Betting that we'll get a pullback around the measured move target. We have another breakout here. And a reversal attempt here. And again, look at the low of this bar. And this bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. This bar. And they're able to take the measured move target. This bar. This bar. And again, look at the low of this bar. And the left. This bar. We have another breakout here. And again, look at the low of this bar. These bar. There's a little bit lower there. This bar issue. This bar. And there's a gap. This low. This bar. This bar. This bar. It's lost bottom mass. A downloin nice. So possible measured move up. And it popped up from a hole here. This bar can be the answer, but for a wanted value, it's probably irrelevant. If the términ L нуж allowed. TINA makes them? Alright. happen. Profit takers. Bulls look at measured move projections to take partial profits. My original measured move was from the middle of the gap, this high to that low. A lot of computers use the bottom of the gap, in other words the top of the bull leg. So the bottom of the bull trend to the top of the bull trend and then they take a measured move up from there. And you can see profit taking here, profit taking there. And then the ultimate high turns out was based upon a measured move using the middle of the gap, the orange line, instead of the red line. I initially look at the red line, the top of the bear trend, even though the gap is up here and the middle of the gap is here. I look at both. If it goes above the red line, then I look for a reversal down based upon the orange line, the middle of the gap. We're in a bear trend and now we have a cell climax here and an even bigger cell climax here. Here's the breakout point. Now we're starting to reverse up. So we're getting a climactic reversal, a cell climax and a reversal. Yet will the reversal close the gap? The gap originally was from this close to that breakout point. And now it's from the breakout point to this high. One of the biggest bear trend bars, 20 or more bars into the bear trend, increased risk of an exhaustive end of the trend. But it still could be a breakout into an even stronger bear trend. And it could be a measuring gap. I call the bar itself a measuring gap, but you could call the actual gap, the pullback breakout point as the gap. But to me, I'm looking at that bar and I'm saying it's either an exhaustion gap or a measuring gap. I call the bar a gap, even though there's no gap. Initially, I want to look at a measured move based upon the start of the current leg to the end of the current leg. We broke below that, possible measured move down here. If it falls below there, then I'll look at a measured move from the top of the bear trend up here. We have a bear breakout bar. And the next bar is a bear bar. That's good follow through. That increases the chances that we're going lower. We have three bear follow through bars. Good for the bears. We have an attempt here to close the gap, but we're failing a micro double top and starting to turn down again. Good for the bears. The pullback did not close the gap, so this is simply a breakout test, a test of the breakout point. The market fell for the measured move, and you can see profit taking, and a small cell climax, and this is a climactic reversal. Yet, it looks like it's failing around the top of the most recent cell climax. And now we have a double top bear flag with this high and that high, or the top of the cell climax and that high. Bears will sell below this bar, looking for a continued bear trend. A bear breakout, another bear breakout. Here's the breakout point. The market went above the breakout point, so the gap closed, but it still could be a continued bear trend. The breakout point. Whenever the pullback overlaps the breakout point, if the pullback does not overlap it by very much, I call it a negative gap, and it sometimes also leads to a measured move. From the top of the bear trend to the middle of that gap, maybe the market will fall for a measured move. This is overlapping by more than what typically happens if you're going to get a measured move down, but it still could result in a measured move down. At this point, it is an exhaustion gap. This cell climax, the gap between this close and that breakout point, it closed over here. This is an exhaustive cell climax, but that does not mean the reversal will lead to a bull trend. We're still in a bear trend, and the reversal up has terrible follow through. Because we have a negative gap, slight overlap of the pullback and the breakout point, we could get a measured move down from the midpoint of the overlap. I still call that a possible gap, the high of the pullback bar, the low of the breakout point, and the measured move might come from the top of this current bear leg or the top of the bear trend. And you can see what happened when the market got down to the measured move target. We have a cell climax and a reversal. We have profit taking. The gap between this low and that high closed. It became an exhaustion gap. This is a climactic reversal that led to an actual trend reversal. We have a big bear trend bar, so it's a breakout, but it's occurring 20 or more bars into a bear trend. Here, it's occurring 50 or 60 bars into a bear trend. Whenever I see the biggest trend bar late in a trend, the odds are it'll be an exhaustion gap, not a measuring gap. It sometimes is a measuring gap, but 60% of the time it ends up as an exhaustion gap and the gap closes. Initially, the gap is between this close and any of these lows, the low of the bar before or any of the lows of the trading range. And then once you get a pullback and a resumption of the bear trend, the gap is then between the top of the pullback, the top of the bear flag, and these lows. Here we have a cell climax and a climactic reversal, and it led to a trading range. Ultimately, we got a trend reversal. Whenever you have a cell climax like this, late in a bear trend, and you start to get a reversal, the first target is always a move just above the top of the cell climax. The bears want a double top with that high and this high, and they want a break below the neckline and a measured move down. The bulls want a break above the double top and a measured move up. The bulls got much more than a measured move up here. Strong breakout, two bars here. Probably going to get a measured move up, maybe based upon the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar. It's a two bar buy climax, and the market had some profit taking at the measured move target. We have a bull trend, and now we have the biggest bull trend bar, late in a bull trend, after the bull trend has gone on for 20 or more bars. More likely an exhaustive end of the trend, less likely a measuring gap, and a measured move up. Whenever I see the biggest bull bar, or the biggest two, three, or four consecutive bull bars occurring late in a bull trend, I assume the odds are it's an exhaustive end of the trend, and that the market would either then enter a trading range, or an opposite trend. The gap is this close to that high. We have a bull flag here, small double bottom bull flag. So then the gap is the bottom of the bull flag, maybe that low and this high, and then we get a climactic reversal, and the gap closed. I would refer to this bar as an exhaustion gap, or an exhaustion gap bar. On the way up, we have a breakout here. The low of this bar, the high of that bar, no overlap, possible measuring gap, and you can see bulls took profits there. And part of this bull trend bar was caused by a buy vacuum test of the measured move target. And there's also a top of a channel here, and that is also a magnet, and the market raced up to get to the top of the channel. We have a pullback here, the bottom of the bull flag. I always look to the left, and is it testing something? Maybe it's testing this high. So this might be a measuring gap. Measured move up, either based upon the midpoint of the breakout and the bull flag pullback, or the top of the breakout point. I usually first look at a measured move based upon the top of the breakout point. And if it goes beyond that, then I look at a measured move based upon the midpoint of the gap. This is the measured move based upon the midpoint of the gap. When the market gets there, I want to see how it behaves. If I'm long, I'm going to take at least partial profits, maybe full profits. And if I'm not long, I start thinking about possibly selling for a scalp. When the bulls see a big bar like this late in a trend, they're excited. What a great opportunity to take profits. They have a surprise move. And they sell. The bulls sell to take partial profits. Sometimes they sell to take full profits. They know that whenever you get a big bull trend bar late in a bull trend, the gap is probably going to close. And therefore, it's a great opportunity to take profits. And you wait to see if the bears simply test down, close the gap, and not create a bear trend. Or if the bears look reasonably strong, and you start to see a lot of bear bodies, in which case the bulls wait to buy. The bulls are not going to take profits here if they think the market's just going to pull back one bar. Because then they have to buy again, and it might be hard to buy again. They're only taking profits because they think the market may correct for 10 bars and two legs, and possibly lead to a reversal after a big bull trend bar late in a bull trend. They want to see what the bears can do. They wait 5 or 10 bars to see if the bears look reasonably strong, and then the bulls wait even more. If the bears, on the other hand, do not look strong, the bulls will buy, betting that the correction is simply a bull flag. Nobody left to buy at this high price. The strong bears are going to sell, and they're never going to buy back their shorts. The weak bears, they sold here, and they're buying back their shorts here. So no more weak bears left. The weak bulls are buying up here, but there are not very many of them. And the strong bulls are taking profits. Therefore, there's nobody left to buy. And you get a pullback, and possibly a reversal. The strong bulls just took profits. They're not going to buy again a bar or two later. They're going to wait 10 or more bars before they buy again. And maybe they buy here. Very tight channel. Most of them would probably wait. Maybe buy here or buy here. The strong bears know the bulls will take profits, and the bears will start to sell. Maybe they'll sell above bars, sell closes, sell below bars. If they do, they probably have to use a wide stop. Maybe based upon the height of this breakout. So the stop would be somewhere up here. And they'll look to add on higher. The safest way to sell would be with a stop order. Here we have a second entry short. Here's the first entry, the market going below this bar. The bulls tried to resume again. We have a micro double top here. We have a small double top here. And now we have a failed breakout for the second time. The breakout failed here. The bulls tried to resume. And now it's failing a second time. That's a higher probability short. Traders who sell early like this, some of them, after a second entry short, would put a stop above this bar or above that bar. Very low risk, very big reward. That always means the probability is low or relatively low. Higher probability to sell after you've seen a strong reversal down. At this point, we've been in a bare tight channel for about 10 bars. And it's higher probability to sell here or below this bare reversal. This is a double top bear flag, this high, and maybe that bull bar. Or you can simply say two legs up, one pull back two, and a decent bare bar. Very tight bare channel, probably minor reversal, and we're going lower. So, a big bare trend bar, therefore a breakout and a climax, occurring 20 or more bars into a bare trend. Here it's occurring 60 or 70 bars into the bare trend. Most likely the gap between this close and that low, or any of these lows, will close. And therefore this is probably going to be an exhaustion gap bar. I simply call it an exhaustion gap. Less likely it'll be a measuring gap, leading to a measured move down. You can see the high of this bar slightly overlapped below that bar. So we have a negative gap, and we could have a measured move down. But the biggest bear trend bar, late in the trend like this, if you're a strong bear, what are you going to do? You're going to use it to take profits. You're going to say, wow, what a big gift. I'm going to take profits. I'll wait 10 bars, 20 bars, 5 bars, to see if the bulls can get a reversal. If the bulls fail and we simply go sideways, then I'll sell again. If, on the other hand, the bulls aren't able to get a pretty good reversal, I won't sell. I'll just wait until I get a sell setup. And here, there never was a sell setup. We have a trading range and a breakout. It fell to a bottom measured move down. A reversal down here, a reversal down here, so I can draw a bear trend line. I can then create a parallel and drag it to a low that would contain all of the prices. And look what happens. We're at a measured move target, and the bottom of a channel fires. The bear has tried to resume again, but we reversed up again a second time. The bears have been short, and they've been selling all the way down. They're looking for reasons to take profits. When you see a big breakout like this late in the bear trend, it's probably an exhaustive end of the move. We're probably going to go sideways, or we might reverse. When the bears see that close, they buy. They buy back their shorts, and they wait. The weak bears might sell here, thinking that finally the market's clearly strong. But if they do, they're going to get trapped. There are just not enough weak bears to keep the trend going. Weak bulls who have been buying long here hoping for reversals, they're giving up. And they're part of the reason why the market sold off like this. Strong bulls, they see this, and they understand what's going on. They know the strong bears are going to buy back shorts. The strong bulls buy, looking for at least a scalp up, maybe a test of the top of the sell climax. The strong bears, they're not going to buy if they're planning on selling again a bar or two later. They're buying because they think the market's going to go sideways to up for maybe 10 bars and two legs. There's no one left to sell at this price. The strong bears are buying. There are not enough weak bears to drive the market down. The weak bulls gave up and caused this bar, or at least contributed to this bar, and they're gone. And all that's left are strong bulls buying for a scalp and strong bears buying to take profits. A brief opportunity for the bulls to buy at a very low price with not much risk. The bulls and bears are both buying, expecting maybe two legs, 10 bars, sideways, two up. When the rally is reasonably strong like this, the bears are not going to sell again. The bulls see that and they buy. They expect this attempt at bear trend resumption to fail. So the bulls buy, looking for another leg up. The bulls who buy this close or this reversal up, or this or that, the risk is not that great. Stop, maybe down here. They're bulls looking for great risk reward. Big reward, low risk. That always comes with low probability. Buying this reversal or these reversals, not a high probability that you're going to make money. However, if you buy after a strong reversal up here or buy closes here, high probability that the market will go at least a little bit higher, but the stop is further away. Buying late after you see the strong breakout, higher probability that you make money, but the risk reward ratio is worse. The stop is usually further away. Bigger risk. There's less profit remaining in the trade, so a smaller reward. It doesn't matter whether you buy down here with the good risk reward ratio and low probability, or up here with the good probability and the bad risk reward. Both are profitable strategies. I began by talking about climactic reversals. A big trend bar of late and a trend, leading to a reversal. Usually it leads to a sideways move, but sometimes it leads to an opposite trend. I finished up by talking about gaps. An exhaustion gap, a big trend bar of late and a trend, leading to an end of the trend. Or measuring gaps, a big trend bar, late and a trend, leading to a resumption of the trend and a measured move. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the third of five videos on climaxes. You mashing causes that go enjoyed, and you want to take an opportunity or сжiver, and 코� Foreman dok multiplie by Abbot in the world. You or