 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth of six videos on swing trading examples. Sometimes the daily chart will be in a buy the close bull trend or a sell the close bear trend. And if it is, it often sets up trades for day traders on lower time frame charts. For example, if it's in a buy the close bull trend, there's often a minor sell-off early in the day and then a bull trend day for the remainder of the day. Day traders should therefore look to buy a reversal up from a minor sell-off. If a daily chart is in a strong trend, for example, a micro channel, which means there are no pullbacks, traders will look to enter on the first pullback. For example, if there's a bear micro channel, four, five, six bars without a pullback, traders will look to sell the first time the market goes above the high of a prior day. If you're day trading, you look to sell a reversal down on a lower time frame chart, a five minute chart, a 60 minute chart. If the market goes above yesterday's high and you get a reversal, look to sell because the odds are the bear trend will resume. When the market's in a trading range, there are often big bull trend bars near the top. Instead of buy the close, you should assume the rally will fail. That means that you should look to sell a reversal down. If you're day trading and you see a reversal down early in the day on the five minute chart or 60 minute chart, it's a sell. Likewise, if there's a big bear bar near the bottom of the trading range on a daily chart and you're day trading and you see an early reversal up, that's a good buy for a swing. Finally, if you see support or resistance on a higher time frame chart, for example, a daily chart or 60 minute chart, and you're a day trader and you see a reversal at that higher time frame support or resistance, it often sets up a good swing trade. This is a daily chart. It's in a strong bull trend. By the third or fourth bar here, fifth bar, you have to conclude the markets in a buy the close bull trend, which means if you buy closes, you're probably going to make money. Even when you have a strong bull trend and a series of strong bull bars, there's usually a tail below the low of the bull bar. And 90% of the time, that's caused by a sell-off that comes early in the day. 10% of the time, a sell-off comes later in the day. If you're trading a five minute chart and you know the market's in a buy the close bull trend on a higher time frame chart, you should look for an early sell-off that reverses up for a possible swing trade. You have to assume that each day is going to be higher and therefore each day will be a bull trend day. And you look for an early sell-off to reverse up. For example, this day. This is that day, five minute chart. You expect a bull trend day and therefore you expect an early low of the day. Here's the open of the day, here's the low of the day, and it reversed up. And that created a small tail on the bottom of the daily chart. A bull bar closing on its high. You can buy above its high or you can wait until there are consecutive closes and buy that close. Here's another pair of consecutive closes. You can buy that close. Or you can look to buy a pullback. We have three pushes down. One, pullback two, pullback three. And then buy above a bull bar, expecting the day will be a bull day closing above its open and possibly a big bull trend day. This was a small bull trend day. The close is only slightly above the open. In any case, you know the daily chart is strong. We have a bull trend lasting for a lot of bars. And now we're possibly in a buy the close bull trend. This is the third bar. By the fourth bar, it's clearly a buy the close bull trend. And the odds are it's going higher. We have a gap up. A bull bar closing near its high. Reasonable to buy above its high. Taking a chance that it's going to be another bull trend day. Higher probability, you wait to buy the close of two consecutive strong bull bars either here or here. Some traders like to buy pullbacks. And here we have a pullback to just below the moving average. Three pushes down, so it's a wedge bull flag. Buy above a bull bar above this bar or above that bar. Looking for a swing up. This is the second day in this green box. Now we've had three consecutive bull bars in a breakout. Chances are this is going to be another bull day. And therefore, if there's a sell-off early in the day, it's probably going to fail and lead to a bull day. Here it led to a big bull trend day. Consecutive big bear bars, but still above the moving average and still above yesterday's close. A good-looking bull bar here. Reasonable to take that buy. Buying on a stop above here. Or you could wait until it gets closer to the moving average and then look to buy above a good bull bar, which you have here. Bull bar closing on its high. Double bottom at the moving average. In fact, it's a triangle. We have lower highs and higher lows. And all of the reversals are coming above the moving average. And there are many bull bars closing at or near their highs. Good buying pressure. Chances are bull trend day. Always better to buy above a strong bull trend bar. Even though the early sell-off was strong, the odds are you're going to get an opening reversal up from support. Usually around the moving average. Here above the moving average. Here at the moving average. You can also buy reversals up from pullbacks to the moving average. Betting that the bull trend will continue on the 5-minute chart and on the daily chart. This is the third day in this box. And the fifth day in the buy the closed market. Again, the market repeatedly tried to sell off strongly on the open. But each time it found support at the moving average. Strong reversal up. Strong reversal up. Strong reversal. Double bottom. You can call it a triangle. You can call it a double bottom. You can call it a pullback from a double bottom. Does not matter. You're getting strong reversals up after strong sell-offs. Remember, on the open, 50% of strong moves up or down reverse. And therefore, even if you see strong sell-offs like this or this or this, 50% chance they're going to reverse. Also, we keep getting reversals up from the moving average. And we know we're in a buy the close bull trend. And therefore, there's often an early sell-off and then a rally. Here's the open of the day. Repeatedly trying to sell off. You have to assume we're going to keep reversing up and close above the open of the day. We had a pretty good bull trend day here. Failed bear breakout. Big reversal. And it's a high two. High one here yesterday. High two today at the moving average. Possible low of the day. In fact, it remained the low for the remainder of the day. Now we have a double bottom at the moving average. Good looking buy signal bar. Another buy. And you can keep buying reversals up from pullbacks to the moving average all day long. The opposite is true if you have a sell-the-close bear trend. There's often a tail on the top of the bar. And 90% of the time, it's caused by an early rally that reverses down. This is a daily chart of General Electric. At some point in here, you have to conclude the markets in a sell-the-close bear trend. The bulls tried to reverse up and the bears sold it at the moving average and we got a strong trend resumption down. Even when you're in a strong bear trend day, there's usually a tail on the top of every bear bar. And 90% of the time, it's caused by an early rally that reverses down. An opening reversal down. 10% of the time, the tail can be caused by a rally later in the day, even if the day closes on its low. If you're a day trader trading on a smaller timeframe chart like a 5-minute chart, you should be looking for an early rally, expecting an opening reversal down for a swing trade down for the remainder of the day. This is that first day in this series. And the bulls have two very big bull trend bars, but they simply tested yesterday's close and the moving average. A good bear bar closing on its low. You can sell below it. Now we have a micro double top. You can sell below that bear bar or this bear bar or any bear bar testing the moving average. Higher probability that your shorts are going to be successful because you know the market's in a strong bear trend on the daily chart. And it's beginning to form a sell the close bear trend. You have to assume that every day is going to close below the open of the day and that you'll get a swing down at some point during the day. Sell rallies, especially early rallies. Always better to be selling below bear bars, especially bear bars around the moving average that close below the moving average. Here's the next day in that series. A strong sell off and a bear trend. We're in a bear trend on the daily chart. You have a strong sell off. But no matter how strong a sell off is, there's always a 50% chance that any strong move on the open is going to reverse. Strong sell off, 50% chance it's going to reverse. Strong rally, 50% chance it's going to reverse down. We have a double top, slightly lower high, a little bit more bearish. We have a bear bar closing near its low. Reasonable to sell for a double top opening reversal. Test of yesterday's close. Test of the moving average for a possible swing down. Later in the day, we have a small double top, slightly lower high. Most double top pair flags are not exact. Very often the second high is below the first high. Less often it's slightly above the first high. When the market's in a micro channel on the daily chart, traders will enter on the first pullback. Therefore, a day trader who sees a bull micro channel will look to buy below yesterday's low. We have a micro channel here on the daily chart and again here. A pullback here, that's the end of the micro channel. A pullback here. It went below the low of the prior bar. And therefore, the micro channel ended at this bar. Once the market's clearly in a micro channel, usually by the end of the third, fourth, or fifth bar, the odds are high, traders will buy the first reversal down. Sometimes the reversal will last two or three bars, but traders are still looking to buy below the low of the prior bar. If you're a day trader, you're going to look for the reversal below yesterday's low to fail and for the bull trend to resume. Therefore, you should look to buy a reversal up once the market falls below yesterday's low. Sometimes the pullback will last two or three days. If you can trade a small position to allow you to use an appropriate stop, you can hold, despite a two to three day pullback, confident that the market will go higher. Initial stop might be all the way down here. You're never going to risk that much. You might risk two to three times the size of an average day. So you might be putting a stop here. You simply have to trade small enough so that you can use the appropriate stop. We have a five bar bull micro channel. Traders on the daily chart will look to buy at and below yesterday's low. And if you're trading a five minute chart, you look for reversals up from below yesterday's low. Here we reversed up from below yesterday's low, but we formed a wedge bear flag opening reversal at the moving average. If you took this buy, you're going to get out below that bear bar because we might be getting a bear trend day. If you're a bear, you could sell this as an opening reversal up to the moving average, a wedge three pushes down one, two, and then three. Sell below the bear bar or the second entry short. However, you know the market's in a bull micro channel and you know the market's going to try to reverse from below yesterday's low. Here, despite the strong sell off, it's simply a big high two bull flag, two legs down, one pull back two. And you know there are buyers below yesterday's low. We have a bull bar closing on its high. You can buy above this bull bar or you can wait until you see a pair of consecutive strong bull bars and then take that buy. This rally totally reversed this sell off. Chances are we're going higher, maybe for a measured move up based upon the height of this rally. Gap down and reversal up from below yesterday's low. Reasonable buy here, reasonable buy here. But when you see the bear bar at the moving average and then the micro double top here, it's better to get out of lungs and look to buy again on another buy signal. Bears will take this as a short, hoping for a swing down. At this point, we have a second entry buy, a good stop entry buy. This is a daily chart of the US dollar versus the Canadian dollar and it's clearly in a bear trend. It's in a micro channel here for four bars and a bigger micro channel here for ten bars. It began with this high and it ended when this bar went above the high of that bar. Every high at or below the high of the prior bar. When that's the case, traders will be eager to sell above yesterday's high when they finally get a chance. If you're a day trader and you look at the daily chart and you see the bear micro channel, you're going to look to sell at yesterday's high or on a reversal down from above yesterday's high. It doesn't matter if you're trading the five minute chart or the 15 minute chart or the 60 minute chart. Once it goes above yesterday's high, you have to be looking for a reversal down. The odds are high. Traders who are trading the daily chart will sell above yesterday's high and therefore the bear trend is likely to resume. Sometimes the pullback can last a few days. Here it's only one day and went briefly above yesterday's high and sold off. You have to trade small enough so that you can use an appropriate stop. You could put a stop all the way up here, but that's pretty far up. Chances are the first reversal up is only going to last one, two or three days and not go much more than the size of an average recent day. And therefore you could use a tighter stop. This is this bear day. You can see yesterday when the market went above yesterday's high, traders sold. It went back above yesterday's high, they sold again. Betting that the bear trend will resume and the result was a bear trend day. It took a double top, but eventually it became a bear trend day. Traders look to sell a reversal down from above yesterday's high. We have a bear bar here. Failed breakout yesterday's high. Reasonable short. The market rallied again. If you get out of your short here or here, it gave you another opportunity to get out of the short. Again, above yesterday's high. A good looking bear bar closing on its low. Reasonable sell for a swing down. When the market is in a trading range on a higher timeframe chart, like a daily chart, and you see big bull trend bars near the top, those are sell the close, not buy the close. If you see big bear bars closing near the bottom of the trading range, the trader should be looking to buy a reversal up. If you see big bear bars closing near the bottom of the trading range, traders should be looking to buy a reversal up. If you're a day trader and you see a big bear bar near the low of the trading range, you should look for a reversal up for a day trade. The day trade may turn into a swing trade over the next two or three days. This is the Euro versus the Yen daily chart. This is the Euro versus the Yen daily chart, clearly in a trading range. There are big bull bars near the top, but look at the follow through. You got reversals. There are big bear bars near the bottom. And look what happened. Instead of a sell the closed bear trend,oup a Perdide trade move, we got reversals. Remember all right for 80% real markets market dánd conta contente, we have that reversal in the film. And have that return. I hope attentes for those at bay 2021 Vid Hoje dear, phải presque take contribution to 100刀 Brewer, rule. Markets have inertia and they tend to continue to do what they've been doing. If they're in a trading range, you have to assume 80% chance every attempt to break out will reverse. Once it's clearly in a bear trend, instead of buying strong bull closes near the top, traders will be selling, looking for reversals down. Instead of selling strong bear bars near the bottom, instead you should be buying them or looking for a reversal up. At the bottom you look for reversals up. At the top you expect the bull breakout attempts to fail and reverse down. If you're a day trader and you see a big bear bar, the next day you should look for a reversal up. If you see a big bull bar, the next day you should look to sell a reversal down. If you buy, you can hold for a test back up to the middle of the trading range. If you sell, you can hold for a test back down to the middle of the range. This is the 60 minute chart of this trading range. This is the big bull day. In green, this is the big bull day. And this is the next day. Micro double top. We went up and down, up and down. Very good looking bear bar closing on its low. Reasonable to sell on a stop below that low looking for a swing down. And you could have made about 100 pips. You would make more if you held for several additional days. We're at the bottom of the range and we have a big bear bar. That is this day in the red box. 60 minute chart. 60 minute chart. You have to assume the bear breakout of 10 foot fail. And therefore, traders should look to buy a reversal up. If you're a day trader trading on the 60 minute chart, here you're getting a good reversal up. Reasonable to buy on a stop above the high of that bar. A bull bar closing on its high. 2 bar reversal. Failed breakout. Yesterday's low. At the bottom of a trading range. The buy zone. If you're a day trader, it's useful to look at higher time frame support and resistance and look for reversals. A bull bar closing on the 60 minute chart. Strong bull trend on the 60 minute chart. Traders bought the moving average here and they bought the moving average here. Even though this was a very strong sell off, it was simply a sell vacuum test of support. If you're a day trader trading the 5 minute chart, you have to be looking for reversals up around the 60 minute moving average. Bulls have been willing to buy far above an average price. When it finally gets down to the average price, it's at a discount and they'll buy aggressively looking for a resumption of the bull friend. You can also look for support and resistance on daily, weekly, and even monthly charts. But those higher time frame support tests come much less often. Support level. Average price. Even when there's a strong sell off like this, traders will look to buy. Bears will look to buy back their shorts. Bulls will look to buy looking for a resumption of the bull trend. Every reversal up on a higher time frame chart begins with a reversal up on a smaller time frame chart. And therefore, if you're a day trader trading the 5 minute chart, and you know the market's pulling back to the 60 minute moving average, you'll look to buy a reversal up on the 5 minute chart. This is a bull trend. If it were a bear trend, traders would look to sell any rally up to resistance. If you're day trading on the 5 minute chart, and you're taking trades based upon the 60 minute chart, you're actually taking a 60 minute trade, and the 5 minute chart is simply an early entry. Here's a strong sell off on the 60 minute chart, and a reversal up at the moving average. And this is that day. Strong bear trend. If you're day trading the 5 minute chart, you're selling all day long. However, when it drops below that 60 minute moving average, you have to be looking to buy a reversal up. This is the 60 minute moving average plotted on the 5 minute chart. It's this line. This is that same line on the 5 minute chart. The market dipped below it, reversed up. The market dipped below it, reversed up. Since you know the 60 minute chart is in a strong bull trend, you know there will be buyers at the moving average. If you're trading the 5 minute chart, you're selling all day, but you know it's going to try to reverse at the 60 minute moving average. You've got to buy back your shorts or even go long. The bulls tried to form a wedge bull flag here. Instead we get a bear breakout, and it fell for a bowter measure move down. 5 minute chart, strong bear trend. It's at support, 60 minute moving average. But you need a strong buy setup if you're going to be buying in a strong bear trend on the 5 minute chart. You want a good buy signal bar. Here we have 3 bar reversal down and up. A bull bar closing at its high. We have a series of sell climaxes here, here, here, and therefore a possible parabolic wedge bottom. And the market tried to bottom here, broke to the downside, and we're just about at a measured move down, based upon the height of this high to that bottom attempt. In fact, it's an exact measured move down. So support here, support at the moving average, parabolic wedge, reasonable to look to buy above a good bull bar. So you buy, you get filled on this little bear doji bar when it went above the high of that bull bar. It's a 60 minute trade. If you want, you can hold for a resumption of the bull trend. Here, if you're a 5 minute trader, you'll get out around the moving average or somewhere near the end of the day. But if you want, you could also hold apart, expecting the bull trend to resume. This is a daily chart of the Euro versus the British pound, and it's a bear trend. Therefore, traders will look to sell at resistance, like at the 50 day moving average, also the test of the most recent sell climax, and around a 50% correction of the sell off. If you're a day trader, you know the market's at resistance on the daily chart. Therefore, you can look to sell a reversal down on the 5 minute chart, 60 minute chart, whatever chart you're trading as a day trader. This big bear day is this day on the 5 minute chart. Strong rally early, but it was a buy vacuum test of resistance. This is the 50 day moving average plotted on the 5 minute chart. Here it is on the daily chart. And it's also a test of that sell climax high and about a 50% pullback. Traders will look for a reversal down at that resistance, especially after a series of consecutive buy climaxes. One, two, three, four. You can look at it as a parabolic wedge top. Here, trading range late in a bull trend, possible final flag. And then we have a very good sell signal bar here on the 5 minute chart. Reasonable to sell on a reversal down below the low of that bear bar. If you want higher probability, here we have a huge bear bar, breaking far below a potential bull flag here. The odds are we're going lower. Reasonable to sell that close or the close of the follow through bar. The bulls are giving up. And chances are we'll get at least a second leg down, maybe more. When the market's in a buy the close bull trend on the daily chart, it often has a small early sell off, creating a tail on the bottom of the bar on the daily chart. Therefore, if you're a day trader trading on the 5 minute chart, you look to buy a reversal up from an early sell off. And the opposite is true if the daily chart is in a sell the close bear trend. There's often an early rally that fails and forms an early high of the day. Day traders will look to sell the reversal down. If a daily chart is in a bull micro channel, chances are there'll be buyers below yesterday's low. If you're a day trader and the market's below yesterday's low, you buy a reversal up. If it's in a sell the close bear trend, you look to sell a reversal down from above yesterday's high. If the market's in a trading range on the daily chart, you should assume that big bull trend bars near the top will fail and not become a buy the close bull trend. In fact, traders will look to sell a close or on the next day, they'll look to sell an early reversal down. If you're a day trader, you look to sell a reversal down on the next day. Likewise, if there's a big bear bar closing near the bottom of the trading range, if you're a day trader, you look to buy an early reversal up on the next day. Finally, if there's support or resistance on a higher timeframe chart, you can look for a reversal at that support or resistance on a smaller timeframe chart. If you're a trader, you can find a new trader that you can find a new trader on the next day. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the sixth of six videos on swing trading examples. If you're a trader, you can find a new trader that you can find a new trader on the next day. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the next day. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the video.