 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on trading Broadbayer channels. I want to talk about two points in this video. First, I want to talk about the sell zones. It's a Broadbayer channel and traders should be looking to sell pullbacks and they should be especially looking to sell a pullback that is around 50% of the most recent leg down. This is the 15 minute chart. It's a Broadbayer channel. The reversals up last a lot of bars. Whenever you get a strong sell up and then an attempt to reverse back up, the bears are going to look to sell somewhere in the middle third of the most recent leg down. We have a bear breakout. This red box is the middle third. This is the sell zone. This is where the bears will be looking to sell. Some will place a limit order to sell at a 50% pullback from the high to the low. Others will sell on a reversal down. For example, we have a bear bar here. We have a bear bar here. Some traders prefer to sell using a stop below the bear bar somewhere in the middle third of the most recent leg down. They'll put a stop above. Minimum goal is a new low. The risk is equal to the reward if you sell the 50% pullback. But the market's in a bear trend and therefore the probability is higher that you'll get down to the reward before you get up to the stop. Therefore, the traders equation is good. Broad bear channels spend a lot of time going sideways. At times when it looks like it's more in the trading range than still in the channel, traders will look to sell in the top third instead of the middle third. They can sell with limit orders above prior highs. Or they can sell with a limit order at a fixed percentage like a 50 to 60% retracement of the bear leg. Here we have a bear leg. It's a trading range. This is about a 50 or 60% retracement of the bear leg. Therefore, about a 60 or 70% rally in the trading range. Most traders should be looking to sell with stops. Therefore, when the market's up in the upper third and starts to reverse down, traders can sell with a stop order below the low of the prior bar. This is not ideal because the cell signal bar has a bull body right here. But it's two legs up, one pullback two. Inside a bigger two-legged pattern, one pullback leg two. And therefore a reasonable sell with a stop above the top of the most recent major lower high. Either here, above here, or up here. It's a bear trend. Bear trends are either breakouts, tight channels, or broad channels. This is a broad channel. It's a bear trend. It's the weakest type of bear trend, but it's a bear trend. And therefore you can sell at any time for any reason as long as you use an appropriate stop. The stop above the most recent major lower high. Strong breakout to a new low. This high is major. As long as any rally stays below this high, the bears can argue that the market's either in a trading range or still in a bear trend. If it goes above that high, then it's no longer a bear trend. Then it's either a trading range or a bull trend. And if you're selling because it's a bear trend and it goes above this high, you know it's not a bear trend. Of course you want to get out. And therefore it's reasonable to get out if your stop is hit. You can sell at any time, including on a breakout to a new low. You can place a stop order to sell just below this low. You can place a stop order to sell just below this low or any low. However, because it's a broad channel, the pullbacks are deep. They retrace a lot of the prior bear leg. You usually can get a much better entry price than selling at that low by simply waiting for a rally above that low. Every time there's a strong breakout to a new low, it begins with a major lower high. And after each new strong breakout to a new low, traders will put their stop above the most recent major lower high. Let's say you sold up here and you're holding short and then we got another breakout to a new low. This is the most recent major high. So it doesn't matter where you sold, you're going to have your stop above this most recent major lower high. Similar to a trading range because so much of the time is within a trading range. It's easier to make money if you wait to sell rallies than to sell breakouts. In general, most traders do not sell breakouts to new lows. The only traders to take these sells, well, for the most part, the only traders selling down here are bulls. And they have protective stops below that low and they're getting stopped out. A bull might buy this as a higher low, major trend reversal. And then once we get this rally, he might put a stop below here or below here and then he gets stopped out. Therefore, you have bulls selling at the new lows. They're getting stopped out and the bears are not selling down here. The bears are buying down here. They're buying back their shorts from selling higher. Instead of selling at new lows, the bears are using prior lows to take profits. They want to take profits somewhere at or below the prior low. If you sell here, you might want to take a profit at that low or some fixed number of points below it or at some other resistance like the bottom of a channel. And that's true with any of these rallies. Bears are selling rallies and then taking profits somewhere below the most recent prior low. It's reasonable to take profits at the low with a limit order or on a reversal up from below the low. For example, here, if a bear sold here, he might take profits, partial profits or full profits here. And then he'll take more profits or exit completely on a reversal up, especially a micro double bottom and a decent buy signal bar. The bulls know the bears are buying. And if the bears are buying, the market's going to go up, not down. And the bulls, therefore, buy exactly where the bears are getting out, betting that there'll be a reversal up that will go up far enough for the bulls to make a profit. Remember, a broad bear channel is just a trading range that's sloped downward. Therefore, the bears expect rallies and they expect the rallies to last a lot of bars. And sometimes the rallies can even make the market always end long. However, as long as any rally stays below the most recent major lower high, it's still in a bear trend. At times when the market is mostly sideways, if bears still believe it's in either a trading range or a broad bear channel, some bears will wait to sell close to the prior high. And they might sell with a limit order or on a stop order on a reversal down. These are all types of double tops, double top with this high and that high or this high and that high. We have a small double top here, double top bear flag, bear trend, double top, sell the reversal down. And then this high and this high or this high and that high, double top. The bears believe that it's in a bear trend. They're expecting every reversal up to fail. Therefore, if there's a big bull trend bar in the middle third or top third of the most recent sell off, bears will sell the close betting that the bull breakout will fail and that the bear trend will resume. Remember, the bears are looking to sell rallies up somewhere in the middle third or even the top third, somewhere in the top half of the most recent bear leg. Therefore, the bears are not selling down here, they're selling up there. There is then a lack of sellers here and the reversal up can be fairly sharp. You get a buy vacuum up to the resistance area, up to the sell zone, and it can be fairly sharp and the market can even become always in long. Here we have a series of bull bars and the market probably is always in long for most traders here. Here, a good bull breakout above a bear flag. The market might be always in long for a lot of traders. The bulls think they won. But the market rallies into the sell zone, the bears are going to bet against the bulls. They'll bet that the bull breakouts will fail and that the market will continue down to a new low. So the bears will sell strong bull bars or reversals down after a strong rally, betting that the rally is minor and that it will lead to a new low. When the market gets up into the sell zone, the upper two thirds, the upper half, the bears overwhelm the bulls and the bulls take profits. Most of the bulls are scalping because they know the market's in a bear trend. The market then goes back down. The bulls are selling out of their lungs. The bears are selling into their shorts. Whenever the market's in a broad bear channel, there are many times when you have two choices for stops and both are reasonable. So this is a major lower high. We have a double top and a breakout to a new low. Reasonable location for a stop. Strong breakout to new low, followed by a reasonably strong reversal up. This is a major lower high. And the same here. Strong breakout to new low, following a reasonable reversal up. Now, is this a major lower high? We have a decent reversal up. We have a sell off and another sell off. But it lacks consecutive big bear bars. So not a strong bear reversal. And it did not go to a new low. The bears can argue that it's a strong enough reversal down so that they do not want the rally to go above this high. But it's really a minor lower high. It did not break strongly to a new low. It did not have consecutive big bear bars. Therefore, if it goes above this high, some bears might get out and sell more on a reversal down. But it's also reasonable to use this high for the stop, for the stop just above this high, because this clearly is a major lower high. If you do use the tighter stop, you'll lose less money, but you'll lose more often. If you use the wider stop, when it does get hit, you'll lose more money, but you'll lose less often. If you take the wider stop or the tighter stop on 10 different trades, your total profit will be about the same. Therefore, if you take any reasonable stop, it doesn't matter if one is further away, the profit result will be about the same. Bears using the tighter stop will sell on the reversal down. Here is the end of the day, and you might wait for a big bear bar and a follow through close bar and then sell the close. 50% pullbacks are always very important because the math favors a resumption of the trend. Probability favors the trend continuing. We're in a bear channel. We're forming lower highs and lower lows. It's a weak trend. It spends a lot of time going sideways, and sometimes it reverses up strongly enough for the market to become always in long. However, because it's a bear trend, by definition, it means it's more likely to go down than up. Therefore, the probability favors a continued series of new lows rather than the market going above major lower highs. If the market sells off and rallies to about 50%, the risk for the bears is to above here, the reward is to down here. Risk equals reward. But it's a bear trend. The probability favors a new low, and therefore, even though the risk is equal to the reward, the probability makes it better to look to sell. It's a positive trader's equation. Bear lag, traders will sell a 50% pullback. Some will sell with a limit order. Others will sell with a stop on the reversal down. If you sell with a limit order, your profit target is a new low, and your risk is just above that high. So the reward is equal to the risk, or just about equal to the risk. But you're in a bear trend, so the probability favors the bears. Therefore, the traders equation is good for taking that short. If you believe it's in a bear trend, then you believe there's a 60% chance that the market is going to go lower. And the result is a good traders equation. Even though the reward is small relative to risk, it equals the risk. The probability more than offsets the weak risk reward. Stop of the top of the most recent major lower high. And then take profits either at the prior low or on a reversal up. A new bear leg. Traders will sell, or many traders will sell with a limit order, 50% of the way up. Betting that the market's in a bear trend, and therefore it's probably going to a new low before it gets above a major lower high. And they're correct. Therefore, you can sell and go for a reward equal to your risk, knowing that the 60% probability of reaching your target before hitting your stop makes the trader's equation positive. Many traders prefer to enter with stop orders, so they'll enter below the prior bar on a reversal down, especially if it has a bear body like here or here. And then take partial or full profits at the prior low. Or on a reversal up, here or here. Or at the end of the session. This is the end of the day. And if you sold up here or anywhere in here, and you're at the end of the session, and you do not want to hold overnight, you just get out. Right before the close. Strong breakout to new low. Odds are any pullback will get back to the low before it gets above the high. And therefore, some traders will sell with a limit order at a 50% retracement of this sell-off, or with a stop on a reversal down, especially below a bear bar. So, here's the 5 minute glowbacks chart. This is 10 days in a broad bear channel. On the 60 minute chart, it's a fairly tight bear channel. The pullbacks are sometimes 20 points tall. And a 20 point pullback means a fairly broad channel on the 5 minute chart. Every broad bear channel is going to have trading ranges, lots of trading ranges. And some of them are nested within bigger trading ranges. Trading range typically is breakout mode. Breakout mode means the probability of a reversal up is equal to the probability of trend resumption down. However, the market's in a fairly tight bear channel on a higher timeframe chart. And that means even if you do get a bull breakout, the odds are the market's going to continue lower. Every trading range in a bear trend has a bottoming pattern. And it also has a continuation pattern, bear flag. Every trading range in a bear trend is a bear flag. But there's always a bottom within it as well. We have a trading range here and it was part of a triangle. This whole area is a trading range as well. And it's a lower high major trend reversal, head and shoulders top. Now we have an expanding triangle bottom, two legs down, one pullback, two. The bulls are hoping for a reversal up. Strong enough reversal, second leg up likely, maybe the top. Likely, maybe this, maybe that. And that was the end of it. So instead of a bull trend, it became a trading range and a bear flag. Three pushes down, so wedge bottom. Bear trend, constantly forming trading ranges. And every trading range has a buy setup. Another wedge. Double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, strong bull breakout to a higher low. And this higher low is a double bottom. The bulls got a swing up, but not much of a bull trend. It lasted about a day or so. Always in long, but still in a broad bear channel. Another attempt at a higher low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout, two legs down to a higher low. And it became another bear flag. Whenever you see any kind of a pattern, there are often multiple ways to label it. But never lose sight of the goal. Bulls are looking for a bottom pattern. It doesn't matter if you call it a wedge, a head and shoulders bottom, a double bottom. As long as you see the bottom attempt, that's all that's important. Some of these bottoms led to rallies that lasted for hours. Yet they formed major lower highs. When the bottom fails, for example, we have a wedge bottom here. One, two, three. And then a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. But look at this. It failed. The bulls who bought put a stop below here or here, and they got stopped out. And the bulls give up. And that results in sometimes a fairly sharp breakout below the prior low. Bulls tried to get a reversal. They had a triangle bottom. They were hoping for reversal up. And they gave up. Bulls tried to get a double bottom or triangle, high or low, after a strong bear breakout. They gave up. Bulls gave up. Bulls gave up. Bulls gave up. Despite all of these bottoms, the bulls gave up. Whenever there's a breakout, the bears are going to look for some kind of a measured move down. In a bear trend, every trading range is a bear flag or it contains a bear flag. Wedge bear flag. Wedge bear flag. A two-legged rally. So a big low two short. Bear flag. Head and shoulders top. Bear flag. Head and shoulders top. Low two. Two legs up. One pull back. Two. So a low two. Bear flag. And lower high. Major trend reversal. We have a bull break out of a triangle that failed. Double top. Lower high. Double top. A wedge rally. So a wedge rally to a double top. All are bear flags. And the odds are the market is going to resume down. A large low two. Leg one. Pullback. Leg two. And leg two. And leg two. Subdivision. So a bull break out of a triangle that failed. Double top. Lower high. Double top. Lower high. Double top. Double top. Lower high. Double top. Wedge rally. So a wedge rally to a double top. All are bear flags. And the odds are the market is going to resume down. A large low two. two subdivided into a wedge rally. A double top lower high. It's a double top bear flag where the second high is below the first. The market broke below the neckline and fell for more than a measured move. Head and shoulders top bear flag. Whenever the market's in a trading range, the probability is close to 50-50 for a bull breakout or a bear breakout, but as long as the market's making a series of lower highs, the probability is always slightly higher that there'll be a successful bear breakout below the bottom of the trading range. Consequently, it's easier for the bears to make money. On a higher time frame chart, as I said, this is a fairly tight channel on the 60-minute chart. That tells you that on the 60-minute chart, it's certainly going to be easier making money selling because you're in a fairly tight channel. This is the five-minute chart. It's a broad channel. This is many days on the five-minute chart. A day trader is going to trade each day as it develops. They're not going to be paying attention to all of these bars. They might be aware of the market being in a bear channel, but they know that the market is often always in long in a broad bear channel. And if you're a day trader, you're going to be buying during this rally. Broad bear channel. And now we're accelerating downward and we're getting a bear breakout below the bear channel. Whenever you have a bear breakout below a bear channel, 75% chance the breakout is going to fail and the market will resume up and test the top of the channel. Whenever I see a strong bear breakout below a bear channel, I look at the highest time frame that shows the broad bear channel. And on that time frame, the bear breakout has a 75% chance of failing and beginning to reverse within five bars. This is a 60-minute chart of this five-minute chart. It fell for about five or six bars and then reversed. Only a 25% chance that a breakout below a bear channel will result in an even stronger bear trend. 75% chance it's going to fail and reverse back up to at least the top of the channel. Here, I have a 60-minute chart. I could have put a 90-minute chart up and it would have been the same thing and the reversal would have occurred after about four or five bars. We have a breakout and we have a reversal attempt and it went a little bit above that low but not much. So there's some overlap. Instead of a gap between this high and that low, I call it a negative gap. But negative gaps usually also lead to measured move projections. And therefore, you can look at the midpoint of the overlap between this pullback and this breakout point and project a measured move down. And you can see the bears took profits at around the measured move target. Very strong bear breakout. And if you're trading the five-minute chart, you're going to trade it like you would any breakout and you'd sell for any reason and hold for a swing down. A breakout is a spike and then we have a channel. So this is a spike in channel bear trend. No channel lasts forever and channels usually ultimately evolve into trading ranges. There's only a 25% chance of a successful bear breakout and then a strong sell-off and another bear trend. There's a 75% chance the breakout will not get very far and then evolve into a trading range or possibly even reverse. Very strong rally in a tight bull channel. Five-minute chart. If you looked at a higher time frame chart, this would be a breakout and therefore it's a spike pullback channel. So spike and channel bull trend. Here we have a spike in channel down. We have a broad bear channel. Broad bear channels usually evolve into big trading ranges and that's what happened here. A broad bear channel has lots of two-sided trading. And at some point the bulls take control and we get a bull leg. The broad bear channel ultimately becomes a bear leg in a big trading range. And that means it'll lead to a bull leg in that trading range. Once the chart starts making a series of higher highs, traders have to exit their shorts because it's no longer a bear trend. It's now a bull trend and the bears will stop selling if the bull trend is strong. We have a higher low and strong reversal up to a new high. So this is a major higher low. We have a small higher low here, but a reversal up above that high and a very tight bull channel. This at some point in here is a major higher low. Any pullback has to stay above that low for the bulls to believe the bull trend is still in effect. I talked about sell zones in broad bear channels. Bears start to sell somewhere in the middle third. If the broad bear channel is mostly sideways, mostly in a trading range, the bears will look to sell further up, maybe in the top third. Traders are always looking to sell a 50% pullback because they know the market's in a bear trend. Therefore, the probability of 60% or more that the market will go to a new low before it goes above a major lower high. Traders therefore sell either with a limit order around a 50% pullback or on a reversal down, expecting a new low. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on trading broad bear channels.