 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on scalping. I would like to begin by talking about the difference between a limit order market and a stop order market. The trading range, especially if it's tight, is a limit order market and traders should only be trading it if they're scalpers and willing to enter with limit orders. Next, I want to talk about the personality that successful scalpers have. Most people do not have that personality. And don't worry about it. Most profitable traders do not have scalpers personalities, yet they still can make a lot of money. These charts look fairly similar. They're obviously in a trading range, but there are some differences between the two charts. For example, look at the open of this bar and the close of that bar. It's above the close of this bar. That means that traders, as soon as this bar closed, hit buy the market and they get filled above the close. Look at the open of this bar and the close of that bar. Again, no overlap. Traders are eager to sell. There's an urgency here. The bars are not overlapping very much on the way up or down. It entered much more of a tight range here. But overall, there are more legs with very little overlap and more of a sense of urgency. This market is a better market for entering with stop orders. On the other hand, look at this chart. The open of this bar is at that close, but the low of the bar fell below that close. And here, we closed here and the next bar opened lower. That means that traders sold the close. As soon as this bar closed, they hit sell the market and the market ended up going sideways. Lots of bars going sideways. Lots of bars with prominent tails. I refer to this type of a market as a limit order market and traders who are trading it in general are scalpers. We have several micro channels in this market, even though it's a trading range. Most of the bodies are big. They do not overlap much. And we have several areas where we have consecutive decent sized trend bars. Traders in a market like this can enter with any kind of an order, stop orders or limit orders. You can scalp this market with limit orders, selling above bars, buying below bars. But you can also enter reversals with stop orders. When it's low, you look to buy a reversal up. Here you have a micro double bottom, down, up, down, up. A decent buy signal bar, you buy. Here we have three decent bull bars. Probably the first pullback will be bought. Some traders would buy with a limit order below the low of this bar. Others will simply sell with a stop above the high of this high one buy signal bar. Small bull trend, pullback, so it's a small bull flag. Buy with a stop above its high. Experienced traders will buy with limit orders or market orders. The strong close of a bar, they'll buy. Strong close of a bar, they'll buy. Disappointment here, and you can see what took place here. The bulls did not like seeing a doji bar. And then another doji bar. And a lot of them placed limit orders to try to get out break even at that close. And experienced traders did it. Others waited, they get out here or here. Reversal down, second reversal down. Tried to reverse down, could not. Tried to reverse down again. Reasonable to sell. Limit order traders. Here we have a low one after a bear trend. At the bottom of what is potentially a trading range. Big up, big down, big confusion usually means sideways or range. Traders will look to buy below bad sell signal bars. A bull body, a doji, a bad sell signal bar at the bottom of range. So traders will place a limit order to buy below the bar. Strong bull bar closing on its high. After a bull bar closing on its high, scalpers will buy that close. They'll buy that close. Is this going to be a lower high leading to a reversal? Not likely after three consecutive bull bars. And therefore it's a bad sell. Bull scalpers will place a limit order to buy at the low of the bar. And they'll get filled here. Reversal down from the top. A parabolic wedge. Push up and then a bear bar. Three bars up and then a bear bar. Two bars up and then a bear bar. Trading range. Up, down, up. Traders will sell with a stop below that bar. Here we have a double top lower high. A double top bear flag. After a very tight channel, almost a micro channel. Traders will sell the double top bear flag. We went up and then down. We went up. Maybe we'll go down. We're near the top of a potential trading range. We have a parabolic wedge. You expect two legs down. One, pull back two. Here we have a wedge bear flag. We went up and then down. And then up and then down, up. And now we have a bear bar at the moving average. Strong big bear trend bar. A breakout test of the bottom of this upper range. Traders will sell with a stop below the low of that bar. Looking for at least a scalp down. Traders will sell with limit orders or market orders. A pair of strong bear bars. Room to the bottom of the range. They'll sell. We have three consecutive bear bars after a parabolic wedge. Traders expect at least a small second leg down. One, pull back two. And they'll sell with a limit order at the high. Here's a high two buy. High one, high two. But three consecutive bear bars. Traders will sell above that bar. Betting that even though this has two legs down. One, pull back two. The channel is so tight. It's probably the first of a more complex, bigger, two legs down. One, pull back. And then two. On the chart on the right, look how prominent the tails are. That means the market tried to trend, it reversed. It tried to trend down, it reversed up. Tried to trend up, it reversed down. Very tight trading range. Reversal is coming every one to three bars. Most traders should not trade when they see the market looking like this. It's too easy to lose money. However, a professional scalper feels very comfortable in this kind of a setting. If they make quick decisions and they can enter with limit orders, and especially if they can scale in and use fairly wide stops, they can make a lot of money even when the market looks like this. Most traders should not be trading that. But professional scalpers will look at it and say, ah, we've got tight trading ranges all the time. I'm here to make money. There's opportunity here. I can do it. They'll bet that every attempt to turn into a trend will fail. At one point, this big doji bar was a big bull trend bar. And the scalper bet that after two bear bars, both with fairly prominent tails, the breakout will probably fail. We went down. We went up. We went down. We went up. We went up. Scalpers will bet that it's a bad buy above the bear bar. They'll place a limit order to sell at its high looking for a scalp. They'll also place a limit order to sell above this high in case it kept going up. They'll sell more here expecting a scalp. They'll sell more above this bar. They'd be selling over here. I don't have it indicated, but they would. Three bars down after a buy climax. Traders will sell above a bull bar, especially one with the big tail, bidding that the best the bulls will get is a trading range. Enough room for a scalp. They sell here. They buy back their shorts near the bottom of a potential double bottom at the moving average. They'll also buy with limit orders. A fairly big bear bar, but also prominent tails top and bottom. They'll look to buy at the bottom. Here we have an entry bar after this reversal down and then up. Bulls will buy at the low of that bar, betting that the first breakout will fail. They'll buy the close of this bear bar, betting against consecutive big trend bars. They'll bet that every time the bears try to get a trend, they'll fail. They might get a couple bear bars, but they're unlikely to get three. For example, two more bear bars. They'll buy here, the close of this bar, betting that the bears will not be able to turn this into a trend. Consecutive bull bars. They'll sell. Also, they're selling at a prior high, looking for a scalp down. Here, we're trying to get a reversal down, but only a doji bar after two bull bars. You have to be very quick to understand what's going on and to make the decisions and to place the orders. And you have to manage the trade quickly. You got to make sure that your profit-taking order and your stops are in the right place. Traders will also scale in higher. For example, if a bear saw this pair of bear bars, prominent tails, trading range, they'll place a limit order to sell at the high of this bar. But they'll also be willing to sell more higher. The second entry has to be at least as big as a scalp. Because a lot of these scale-end traders are looking to take profits around their original entry. And they want to make at least a scalper's profit on the second half. They get out break-even on their first, and they get a scalper's profit on the second. The same here, a pair of bear bars. It's fairly low in the range to be selling, but traders might sell above its high. Sell more higher, at least the size of a scalp above, expecting the market to pull back below the high of this bar. Which it did right here. And then they get out break-even on their first entry. They sold at this high. And then they get out with the scalper's profit on the second entry. And part of the reason this reversed is bear scalpers were buying back their shorts. I talk about swing trades and scalping with stop orders in other videos like trading in the open. I'm not going to talk about that much here. I'm going to talk much more about limit order and market order trades in trading ranges and in broad channels. A broad channel is basically a trading range that's tilted up or tilted down. When the market's clearly trending fairly strongly, not much in terms of overlap, not much in terms of prominent tails, most traders will consistently make much more money if they swing trade. Look to enter early. A bear flag, a low one bear flag, sell. Low one bear flag, sell. Up, down, up, down, up. A wedge, bear flag at the moving average, sell. We have a higher low, major trend reversal. Four consecutive bull bars. Almost a bull bar here. Eight consecutive bull bars. Traders will look to buy. Either a high one or a high two. Bear breakout. The bull's trying to have a bull flag here after this small rally. Instead we've got a bear bar and a second consecutive bear bar confirming the breakout. This is follow through selling. Traders will sell. Here we have a higher low, major trend reversal and we have three consecutive bull bars. Bulls will start buying closes. They'll buy the closes this bar, this bar, any of these bars, confident that the first reversal down will be minor, become a bull flag and the market will resume up. If you take a sell for any reason anywhere in here, even if you sell here, your stop is up here, the top of the most recent strong sell-off. And every time you get a new breakout to a new low with a reasonably strong sell-off, traders will tighten their stops. Once this bar closes, the bears who sold for any reason through here will lower their stop from here down to here. And the same is true here. No matter where you sold, if you sold here, if you sold below that bar, if you sell below this bar, once you've seen two or more consecutive bear bars closing near their lows, breaking to a new low, traders will lower their stop to above the most recent major lower high. It's major because traders will consider the bear trend intact as long as it keeps making major lower highs. If it gets above a major lower high, traders will assume the bear trend has ended and the market has evolved into either a trading range or possibly even a bull trend. Here's a major lower high and the market rallied above it. We already knew that it probably was a bull trend before it got above that high. But once it does get above that high, the bears give up their premise that it's still a bear trend. They assume it's either a trading range or now a bull trend. If you are swing trading, you continue to hold your position until either your stop gets hit or until there's a reasonable opposite signal. You could argue getting out at the bottom here makes sense. Three pushes down, one, two, three, a possible wedge. A lot of traders will exit not above this bar, but above the bull bar here or after they believe the market is trying to convert into a trading range, forming a higher low major trend reversal. A lot of the bears will exit here. And here the bulls might exit here. Three pushes up, one, two, three, or one, two, three, and a bear bar. Knowing that a bear channel usually evolves into a big trading range. We have a spike pullback channel. We're near the top of the channel and it's a logical area for the bulls to take profits. And therefore, if you have any kind of a wedge top and a decent sell bar, a decent bear body, bulls will take profits no matter where they bought. Just because bulls take profits does not mean the signal is strong enough for the bears to sell. If the channel is tight like this, the bears will wait in general for a second signal. They won't take the first signal. But the first signal, especially when the location is near the top of a possible developing trading range, is good enough for the bulls to exit. And if the market resumes up, they'll buy again. In the E-mini, if a trader took this sell and sold the close of the follow through bar after the bear break below the bull flag, it's reasonable to exit on this reversal up. We have a small double bottom or a wedge bottom, one, two, three, and we're starting to get trading range types of bars. Smaller bars, doji bars, prominent tails, and sideways. The strong trend might be ending. If a bull bought here, and as I said, a wedge near the top of the channel, possible trading range, it's reasonable for a bull to take profits here with 10 points. We're starting to get smaller bodies, a lot of overlap among the bars. It's entering a tight trading range. In fact, you can call this whole 40 or 50 bars a tight trading range. When there is no clear trend, many traders either scalp, experienced traders will do that, or they wait for the next trend. For example, a higher low major trend reversal. Higher probability to buy after you see a series of bull bars, consecutive bull bars closing near their highs, but a reasonable buy here as well. A wedge higher low. Bear bars, bull bars. Bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, bull bar. Three pushes down to a higher low. I've been talking about a lot of scalps in trading ranges in which you're buying near the bottom, betting that the bear leg will fail and reverse up. You're selling near the top, betting that the bull leg will fail and reverse down. Scalping in the direction of a strong trend is also a good strategy. One of the problems scalping in a strong trend is scalpers tend to take their profit and then take a break for a bar or two or three, and then they miss the next scalp. And they end up taking far fewer scalps than what you see on the screen. And they'll end up making far less money than a swing trader when the trends are strong like this. When you're scalping, you're going for a small profit. And that means you need very high probability to offset the terrible risk reward. For example, if you're selling this close for a scalp, it doesn't matter whether you're selling for a scalp or a swing, your stop is still up here. The swing trader is going to hold for a big profit. The scalper is just looking for a little profit. A scalper taking that much risk for this profit in general is better off if he's willing to scale in higher in case the market goes up near his stop. That's one way to increase the probability to offset the bad risk reward. Usually, the risk is at least as big as the reward. And therefore, you have to be winning 70 or 80% of the time for this to be a profitable strategy. That is very difficult for most traders to do. And therefore, most traders should not scalp. A trader can consistently make a good profit scalping if he takes high probability scalps. There are not many that are high probability without proper management. For example, using wide stops and scaling in. For example, the bear who sold the close of this follow through bar after the bear breakout has a stop up here, did not pull back very much. And here he can exit with two points profit. And when you look at that, he sells here and buys back his shorts here. He made very little compared to the size of the trend. Also, compared to the size of his risk. Not an ideal way to trade. Just because mathematically it might make sense to take profits here, does not mean that it's the best solution. In general, going for the minimum for anything in life is a bad idea. Hoping to make minimum wage for your career is a bad idea. A bear who sells low here, a wedge bear flag, a low 3 short, low 1, an attempt at a low 2, and then a low 3 at the moving average, puts a stop above the top of the most recent major lower high. We have a series of bear bars, two of them, pretty good size closing in their lows and a new low. If this is still a bear trend, it should not get above a major lower high. It certainly should not get above this lower high. This is a reasonable location for a stop. This is a higher probability. In general, when you use a stop that's further away, it's not going to get hit as often, but when it does get hit, you're going to lose more money. Both are reasonable. Stop here at the top of the wedge channel, 1, 2, 3, or a stop here at the top of this small major lower high. If you take this trade a hundred times using the tighter stop or using the wider stop, you'll end up with about the same amount of money. A trader could buy this close knowing it's the third consecutive bull bar after a higher low major trend reversal, and the market's probably going higher. If he takes that buy, he has a high probability of making money putting a stop down here. And he could exit here, a two point profit, a small scalp. But when you look at the size of the swings on the screen, going for a two point scalp here and going for a two point scalp here, just looks too small for the size of the risk and for the size of the profit potential. Most traders should not be doing that. Professional scalpers who do buy, exit, buy, exit, buy, exit, can do very well. Sell, exit, sell again, sell again, and then exit. And they just repeatedly sell. But that is very difficult to do. It's very difficult to get out and then immediately get back in or get back in a bar or two later. It sounds good, but it's very difficult to do. And very few people can do that. It's much better when you see a market having a reasonably good swing and a likelihood of having a swing, hold for a swing and rely on your stock. A bull scalper, we have a bull channel, a bear breakout, probably will fail. High one, high two with a bull bar, you buy above, exit with two points. That's another example of a scalp in the direction of a trend. This video, I'm not going to be talking so much about the trends. I'm going to be talking about the trading ranges and scalping within those ranges. And during the transitions from a trend to a trading range. A lot of the time, the environment is much better for scalpers and most traders should not be trading. When the market looks like this, swing traders are not making money. They're not making money here. They're not making money here. They are if they're holding, hoping for trend resumption, trend resumption up. But in general, these are areas where scalpers can make a lot of money. The tighter the trading range, the less likely swing traders will make money. And the more bars they have to hold while they wait for a trade to become profitable. For example, if you're a bear holding short down here, let's say you sold anywhere in here, and you're hoping for a profit, it's still below the most recent major lower high. We still do not have a credible buy signal. And therefore you end up holding for 10 bars, 20 bars, waiting for your premise to play out, waiting to make money. And that's just part of the game. If you're a swing trader, that's what you're going to do. Scalpers look for trading range environments, and then they bet against breakouts. Here we have a strong bear breakout to a new low. Here's the breakout point. Look at this. Look at the high of this bar, and look at the low of that bar. Do you see what took place? The market went above the high of that bar. Therefore, pullbacks are going above breakout points. And what does that tell you? It tells you that a bull who either bought this low and bought more lower could make money. He buys at this low. He buys more, at least the size of a scalp lower. And then places a limit order to get out into this first entry. He gets out break even there, and then with a profit on his lower entry. This is what I call a stairs pattern. Whenever you're in a channel, but the pullbacks are overlapping the breakout points, that tells you that traders buying below the bars are making money. It also tells you that the bears are taking profits below every new low. This is a good environment for scalpers. As a trend goes on, remember the market cycle. Initially, you have a breakout and then a channel, and then the channel gets flatter. It transitions into a trading range, and then either breaks in the opposite direction. Here we have trend reversal, or it resumes down. You get another breakout, and then another channel, and another trading range. When you start getting stairs patterns, you know the bulls are making money in a bear trend. And therefore, it's the earliest sign that the market might be soon transitioning into a trading range. Some bulls will buy the low and buy more lower. Others, instead of buying the low, will simply buy lower, the size of a scalp or twice the size of a scalp, expecting the market to come back above the breakout point. A lot of scalpers do not do that until they see a stairs pattern. For example, would I buy below this bar or this bar? We don't know if this pullback overlapped the breakout point. But let's say it did not. Let's say the prior low was here, and there's a gap between this low and that bar. That is not a stairs pattern. We're getting gaps, possible measuring gaps. Traders are much less willing to buy prior lows. However, once you see a pullback going above a breakout point, the scalpers start to trade. They start to buy at the prior low and lower, or they simply buy lower. If they bought that low and bought more lower, at least the size of a scalp, if it gets back just a little bit above that low, these scalpers will be able to get out with the limit order. They buy here in case it just goes straight up. They'll make a scalp and they'll exit. And they're willing to buy more lower in case it goes a little bit lower. It might go one times the size of the scalp. It might go two times the size of the scalp. They'll buy more. Betting that it'll start overlapping breakout points. It'll overlap the breakout point here. Trends tend to become weaker. And therefore, you get more trading range price action. And the overlap tends to become greater. They want to make at least the size of a scalp. If they buy here and buy more here, they'll place a limit order to get out break even at that low. They get out break even on this trade and with a profit on this lower entry. As I said, some bulls do not place a limit order to buy at that low and then more lower. They simply place the limit order to buy one point or two points or three points below that low. Betting that we're now in a stairs pattern and we'll get above this low. They know that sometimes it'll just go a tick below the low and rally strongly and they'll be flat. They won't be in the trade. But a lot of times they'll take that chance. They see that it fell a couple points below this low here. It probably will fall a couple points below the low here. And therefore, instead of buying at the low and adding on, just take the second entry down here and then scalp out with a profit. Here's an example of what I was talking about. If a bull bought with a limit order at this low and he was willing to buy more lower, it never went lower. It immediately went up. So he did not have to scale in. He immediately got his profit. Exit with the scalp, betting that the market is probably going to be in a trading range. He doesn't know where the top of the range is. It might be simply here. However, he made his scalp and he's happy to exit and then look for his next trade. I talk more about scaling into trades above prior highs and below prior lows for scalps in several of the videos. Trading in tight bull channels, tight bear channels, broad bull channels, broad bear channels, trading ranges, and in the video on losing because of mistakes. I'm not going to talk too much about it here. Here's a five minute chart of the E-mini and then a five minute chart of the Euro versus the dollar. Some traders scalp one of them. Some traders scalp both. There's a big difference between scalping in these two markets. Can you see what it is? It's a very important difference. Most scalpers use charts that are one minute to 15 minutes long. Most scalpers in general, most traders should not be trading on any chart that has more than 20 bars per hour. In other words, a three minute chart. I use five minute charts. In the E-mini, most days an average bar is six to ten ticks tall on a five minute chart. The minimum scalp in the E-mini is one point. And therefore, the average bar is 50 to 100% bigger than the minimum scalp size. In the Forex market, the Euro versus the dollar five minute chart, most of the bars are six to ten pips tall. But the smallest scalp traders should consider is ten pips. And therefore, most of the bars are smaller than the smallest scalp. In the E-mini, most of the bars are bigger than the smallest scalp. That is critical. Because in the E-mini, if every bar is bigger than a scalp, you can scalp on almost every bar. There are countless scalping opportunities in a chart where the bars are bigger than the smallest scalp. On the other hand, if you're scalping on a five minute Forex chart, there are far fewer trades. A good trader can make money in any market. I want to talk a little bit about a scalper's personality. Everyone is drawn to scalping when they start out because of two things. The risk is small. When traders start out, their greatest fear is losing their account. It's their death of a dream as a trader. And therefore, they're drawn to trading styles that have smaller risk. In other words, scalping. However, to trade professionally as a scalper for year after year after year, and to do it happily and profitably, you need a whole bunch of personality factors that most traders simply do not have. But don't worry about it. You can make a lot of money as a swing trader. And most traders who make a lot of money are swing traders. This is a five minute chart of the E-mini. The day session has 81 bars. And an average day has about 40 one point scalps and about 20 two point scalps. Scalpers will enter with stop orders, limit orders at the market. They'll use wide stops. They'll scale in. An incredible number of opportunities to make money. These are all reasonable scalps. I'll talk about the basis for most of these trades at some point over the next many videos. And you can see the bears, lots of opportunity to sell. The bulls, lots of opportunity to buy. Nobody takes all of these trades, but a good scalper will take a lot of them. There are also many other scalps that I did not show. There are reasons to enter on every bar. If you look at the volume on a chart, every bar has a lot of contracts being traded. That means there's a lot of trading taking place on every bar. And a good scalper understands the forces going on. They understand what the bulls are doing. They understand what the bears are doing. And they're constantly trying to structure profitable trades. Where do I enter? Can I buy here? Can I sell here? If I buy, where's my stock? Can I scale in? Where do I get up? I said that a lot of beginners are drawn towards scalps because of the minimum profit. A lot of experienced traders are drawn to it because of the great profit potential. If you have 40 opportunities to scalp during the day, that's 40 points. And if the range is 15 points tall, you're making 40 points on a range that's 15 points tall. You're making more than twice as many points as there are in the range. Some traders can do that. Very few can. But those who can, can make a lot of money. And therefore, they scalp. There are a few very good traders who scalp as their primary method of trading. Again, it takes a lot of experience to scalp profitably. And it also takes an unusual personality to be able to do it comfortably year after year. Trading has to be fun. If you're going to be doing this forever, it has to be fun. And just because you can make money as a scalper does not mean it's right for you. If you feel stressed out and miserable doing it, don't do it. Swing trade instead. Find a style of trading that suits your personality. You have to be happy. Life has to be fun. As I said, almost every bar has some kind of a setup for a scalp. And an extreme scalper might take 20 to 40 trades a day. Most experienced scalpers take about 10 trades a day. Some days they might take 20. If you are taking 20 to 40 trades a day, you're doing manual high-frequency trading. Again, extremely difficult to do. Extremely difficult to do profitably. In the E-mini, the minimum scalp size is one point. Great traders can scalp for one to two points all day long and win 90% of the time. I've known many traders who have done that over the years. But very few can do it long-term. I had a friend who would look for swing trades every day, but he liked to scalp to show off. I traded with him online for years. And most of the days he would be going for four-point trades. And then every now and then he'd say, hey, Al, I'm going to scalp today. And he would take a whole bunch of one-point trades. He'd probably take 15 or 20 one-point trades. And I remember a lot of days in which he won on every trade. But he said it was too stressful and it was not fun. He liked doing it to show off. There are fun things to do in life that you don't want to do every day. You don't want to climb the top of a tall mountain every day. But you do want to do it occasionally because it gives you a sense of accomplishment. Just because you can do something doesn't mean you should be doing it for your career. If you climb Mount Everest, you don't want to be climbing it every two months for the rest of your life. It's not fun. It's fun the first time, but it's not fun the fifth time or the 20th time. In this video, I talked about trading ranges as limit order markets. Markets where scalpers take trades at the bottom, betting that it will go up. They buy at the bottom. They sell at the top. Betting breakouts will fail. And the trading range will continue. I then talked about the personality of scalpers. Most traders do not have the personality that would allow them to scalp profitably long-term. It's simply not fun for most traders. However, if you are that rare person who can scalp profitably and you enjoy doing it, then it's a good opportunity for you. Every trader, every swing trader takes scalps some of the time. Not necessarily because they plan the scalp, but a lot of swing trades end up disappointing the trader as soon as he takes the trade. It will scalp out with a small profit. And therefore, knowing how to scalp is valuable. I'm Al Brooks. This is the first of five videos on scalping. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course.