 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos on trading climactic reversals. I'm going to focus on minor climactic reversals in this video. A minor reversal is typically small and is not strong enough to lead to a major reversal of the trend. For example, from a bull trend to a bear trend or a bear trend to a bull trend. More likely it's going to lead to a trading range or a pullback. I think it's important to remember the market cycle. It's rare for a strong trend to reverse into an opposite strong trend. Usually it has to transition into an intermediate state first like a trading range. And therefore, if you have a strong trend that is trying to reverse, the reversal is probably going to be minor and result in either a bull flag, if you're talking about a bull trend, or a trading range. If you're talking about a bear trend and you get a fairly minor reversal, you're probably going to get a bear flag or a trading range. However, once the market enters a trading range, it then always tries to come up with a credible reversal pattern. About 40% of the time you will get an actual trend reversal from a credible reversal pattern. The market's trending up and now we get a bigger bar and therefore it's a climax. There's a tail on top. There's a follow through bar, which is good for the bulls, but that tail is a problem. If I were to draw a trend line connecting these highs, this is a bull breakout above these highs. It's also a breakout above a trading range and it's also a parabolic wedge. Three pushes up. One, two, three. A lot of traders would consider selling the close of the follow through bar, especially after this big tail. I think it's not likely to be a very profitable short because of how tight this entire channel is. Yes, it's a buy climax, but a trader taking that short probably has to use a fairly wide stop, at least a measured move up, maybe based upon the height of this final leg. So a stop up here and he probably has to be willing to scale in higher to make money. However, a lot of bulls will take partial profits just in case we get an endless pullback and then a bear break out. Typically, when you have a buy climax and a bear is selling, he's looking for a test of the bottom of the buy climax. And a test can be exactly down to the buy climax low. It could be a little bit below or here a little bit above. And you can see at one time this bar was a big bear bar with a close at the low and then it got a tail into the close of the bar. And then the next bar reversed up. A lot of the bears who did not scalp out already will get out on this reversal up. They're afraid that this is going to be a double bottom. This low, testing that low and then breaking above the neckline and rallying for a measured move. And the bulls know that as well. If you want, you can call it a high two. There's a high one here. And then going above the prior bar would be a high two buy. Plus it's a double bottom. Plus you have a very tight bull channel. Therefore, it's likely that the sell off is going to be a bull flag and the bull trend will resume. And therefore, bulls who are not long will buy above the high of this bar betting on the high two, knowing that the bears will give up. If you want, you can also call it a wedge. Three or four pushes down. One or one and then two or three. Or one, two and then sideways and then three. Another breakout. You'd expect at least a small second leg up. And the bulls got it. But a fairly tight trading range, late in a bull trend, often becomes the final flag. And look at this. We have a bull bar, bad follow through, bull bar, bad follow through, a pair of bull bars, shrinking bodies, and then a doji bar. This is a wedge higher high. And a lot of the bulls will get out below this low, betting that we'll get a couple of legs down. This is the end of the day. There's no time for two legs down. However, the bulls who did buy would either get out below this doji bar on the close of that doji bar, or maybe on the close of the spare bar. When you're selling a buy climax, the goal is a scalp. However, if you get decent selling pressure in the reversal down, the reversal down is minor, then the bull trend resumes and reverses a second time. That is more likely to lead to a major reversal. This is not much selling pressure. The market went sideways for about seven or eight bars. But where are the consecutive big bear bars? Why did it not fall below the buy climax low? Why are there no very big bear bars? This is probably not a strong enough minor reversal for traders to look for a major reversal. And also, the end of the day. Do you want to be selling this for a swing down? There are only three bars left in the day. You're not going to get a swing. You can call it a small major trend reversal, higher high, major trend reversal, wedge higher high. But end of the day, if you're selling, at best you're hoping for a scalp. Because it's not going to fall all that far when there are only three bars left in the day. When you have a fairly strong bear trend, even if it's climactic, the first reversal up is typically minor. Which means it becomes a bear flag or a trading range. However, once it enters a trading range, then it has a chance, a better chance, of a major reversal. We have a bigger bear bar after two or three smaller bear bars. Actually, this bar is the biggest bear bar in this entire series of six bear bars. And therefore, it's an increase in the selling and therefore climactic. It's also forming about 20 bars into the trend. And when I look back at this, it's probably the single best bear bar in the entire trend. When you get exceptional strength late in a trend after 20 or more bars, it's more likely to lead to exhaustion than an acceleration of the trend. Exhaustion, an exhaustive sell climax, does not mean the market reverses up. It means that the bears are exhausted. They'll take partial profits. Bulls might start to scalp. However, the reversal up usually tests the top of the final sell climax, this high, and then enters a small trading range. When you have a very tight bear channel like this, the first reversal up is not likely to lead to a bull trend. You're probably going to need some kind of a double bottom and the bear trend will probably resume. You can see it tested the low close here. However, once you get that double bottom, you have a better chance of a major reversal. So sell climax in a very tight bear channel, minor reversal into a trading range. And once in the trading range, the bulls will try to get a double bottom. Here is slightly higher low. It could be a lower low. It could be an exact double bottom. And once you get that, especially with a good looking bull signal bar like this, there's a better chance of a bigger reversal. This entire series of bear bars, seven bear bars, is a climax. And the market may test up to the top of that climax, which it did. When you have the sell climax bar and then you have a follow through bar, especially with the tail and not a particularly big body, some bulls will buy looking for a test up here. Again, first reversal up is minor and therefore bulls buying here in general are mostly looking for a scalp. Bulls buying here, some will scalp part and some will swing. And once we've had three decent bull bars like this, the market's always in long. And we're probably going to the next major lower high, which would be the top of the series of bear bars. And the bulls who did not fully scalp out would take more profits here. After this many bars up, we're likely to go higher. So the bulls might be holding on to part of their position even after this. Is this a big enough pattern for a major reversal? Not typically. Sometimes if it's in the first hour, a small pattern can be a major reversal. Here we have a sell climax on the open. Even though it's at 830, it could be the low of the day. And therefore it's reasonable to swing at least part. And once you start to get a series of bull bars like here, three bull bars, four bull bars, it's by the close, it's always in long, and it's likely that we're going higher. And this might in fact be the low of the day. And therefore this could be a major reversal. For the bears, very tight bear channel. First reversal up, not very strong. The entry bar has a big tail on top. The signal bar has a bear body. The next bar, tail, small body, and then a bear bar, another bar with a big tail. At this point, this is a bear flag. And a lot of bears will sell, at least for a scalp. Because of the prominent tails and small bodies, this is likely a bull leg in what will become a trading range. And therefore the bears selling here, for the most part, will scalp. Not a good looking sell signal bar. It has a bull body. So again, trading range behavior, bear selling for a scalp. They might swing part because we're still in the bear trend. But you've got four bull bars, no strong bear bars, not a good sell signal bar. Probably the first leg down will be bought and will either enter a trading range or form a double bottom and reverse up. We have a pretty strong bull trend here. You can argue it's a second leg trap or a parabolic wedge. Three pushes one, two, three, or one, two, three. We have a breakout. You'd expect a second leg up. However, it could simply be a bi-vacuum test of yesterday's high and the high of today. Especially after a big sell-off like this. When you get a big sell-off here, over 10 points and a reversal, usually the reversal does not lead to a big bull trend. It can get to a new high. However, it usually does not go strongly up from there, usually in interest of trading range. At this point, we have a fairly strong bull trend. Every bar has a low at or above the low of the prior bar. The first reversal down probably only minor, which means a trading range or a bull flag. Not likely to enter a bear trend without first going sideways and creating a major trend reversal. We have a gap here. The market is rallying weakly. And then we have a big breakout. Is this an exhaustive end of the trend? It might be. It might be a bi-vacuum test of the top of the bear leg. And it's a second leg up. One, pull back. Two. Could be a second leg trap. However, I think more likely this reversal up is so strong that this sell-off is probably the low of the day. And today's going to be a reversal day, which means we'll probably get up near the high of the day. Maybe a little bit above. Probably a measuring gap from this low to this high. The market probably will rally for a bottom measured move up. The bull is getting a very big bull breakout above a bull channel. Fairly tight bull channel. Again, it could be a parabolic wedge. It is a parabolic wedge. Some traders would say this is the first push. Others would say this or this was the first push. And then second and third. Big breakout above the top of the bull channel. Also, a breakout above the high of the day. But look at the size of this tail. So that is a lot of selling. And when you get that much selling up there, probably you have big up, big down, big confusion, and probably sideways for a number of bars. This is probably an exhaustive buy climax. This is probably a buy climax that will lead to a measured move up. This is the biggest bull bar. 20 bars or so into the bull trend. Failing at yesterday's high. Trying to break above the top of a bull channel and failing. Probably the market is going to go sideways to down for about 10 bars. The bulls will get out. We have a bear II, a pair of bear bars. We have a bear bar closing on its low. Bears will sell here at least for two legs down. One pull back two or one pull back into a triangle and then two or two. And bulls will get out. Whenever you have a bull trend and then a tight trading range, it's always good to be looking for some kind of a double top. If you get a double top, especially one with a decent sell signal bar, you'll have a 40% chance of two legs down. One pull back two. And therefore bears will look to sell. Usually you do not get the reversal until the trading range grows to at least 10 bars. Here's a double top, but barely 10 bars. You have a bear bar. You could sell below that. You can see we broke above this high. And now we've got another reversal bar. Again, a bull bar. Not all that great. We have another reversal bar here. At least it's not a bull bar. It's failing at this high again. Probably a 40% chance you're going to get at least a couple legs down. So a reasonable sell. 60% chance it's going to continue sideways or it'll just go up. However, 40% chance of a swing down where the reward will be at least twice as big as your risk. And therefore the math is good for the bears. Their actual risk if they sold below the low of this bar is to just above the high of the bar. And if they exited above this bull bar or above this bull bar, they made many times greater profit than the size of their actual risk. That is a very good trader's equation. And therefore it was reasonable to take that short. Entering in a tight trading range, your stop is not far. Either above the high of this sell signal bar or above the high of this sell signal bar. Your risk is not great. And that immediately tells you that the probability is not all that great. Whenever you have a very good risk reward profile, small risk or great reward, the probability of achieving your goal before your stop is hit is small. Right? So also entering in a tight trading range with the stop is always going to be a low probability bet because the market is very balanced and you're betting that in this case the bears will win. At best you have a 50-50 chance. Following a strong bull trend, you probably only have a 40% chance. But the math is good. Some traders do not want to take the low probability trade. Even though the risk is small, they wait for a breakout with one or two very big bear bars or three ordinary bear bars and then sell. At that point, they have a higher probability trade, but their stop is further away. In other words, the risk reward profile is worse, but the probability is better. For example, the bears could sell the close of this bar and put a stop maybe above the top of the three bear bars expecting at least two legs down. One, pull back two. And once you get a confirmed breakout like this, three consecutive bear bars breaking below the trading range, the close of this bar below maybe 10 or 15 bars, and the close of this bar. A second follow through bear close after the bear breakout. The probability is high that you'll get a second leg down. And typically, when you have a double top tight trading range, lower high, major trend reversal like this, the second leg down is bigger. It's climactic. Double top here and here. If you want, you can call it double top here and here. And it's a lower high. We have a bull trend, a bear breakout below the bull trend line. And therefore, it's a double top and a lower high major trend reversal. It's a type of lower high major trend reversal in which the lower high has a double top. You can also call it a triangle. We have four pushes up, one pull back two, pull back three, pull back four. Because the second leg down is typically climactic, a lot of the bears will take profits above the bull bar, especially since it's also a breakout test of this high. And it's a higher low. And we have big down, big up, big confusion usually results in a trading range. Trading ranges have deep pullbacks from strong legs. This is a strong leg. This is a deep pullback. More likely, we're going to form a higher low than a new low. If you get a bull bar like this closing in its upper half, I think you have to get out above it or certainly above this bull bar closing on its high. Here's the open of the day and we have a big bear breakout, consecutive bear bars. The market's always in short. However, whenever the market makes a strong move on the open, there's a 50% chance the move is in the wrong direction. We have a bear trend and then we have a trading range late in the bear trend. This is probably going to be the final bear flag. We might get a second leg down after two big bear bars like this, but we're getting a reversal up. And this is actually kind of interesting. This is the first reversal up when the market went above the high of this bull bar. And then the market tried to resume down with this bear bar. And then it went above the high of that bear bar as well. This is a type of second entry buy above the high of that bear bar for a failed breakout below yesterday's low. A second entry buy. The first is above this bull bar. The bear trend resumed and the second is above that bear bar. Whenever you have a bear trend, you have a 50% chance of some follow through selling on the open of the next day. Sometimes it's on the open, sometimes it's an hour later. But you also have a 75% chance of at least two legs sideways to up beginning by the end of the second hour. And therefore, if you get a sell off like this, you have to be aware there's a 75% chance you're going to get two legs sideways to up. Here we got two legs sideways. First leg, pull back, and then second leg. This is too small. First leg, pull back. Second leg. The pattern is too small to correct this. Typically, the pattern is going to last about 20 bars. So, I'm looking for a correction that's going to last at least 20 bars on a five minute chart that's about two hours. Here, it lasted all day. So, it lasted more than five hours. This is a pretty good buy above this bull bar betting on a final flag and an opening reversal. A sell vacuum down to below yesterday's low and a failed breakout below yesterday's low. A big magnet here, trading range. A lot of trading range price action yesterday. And therefore, probably a lot of trading range price action today. And if you see a strong breakout below the trading range, you have to bet there's at least a 50% chance the breakout is going to fail. And when it's happening on the open like this, 50% chance that you're seeing the low of the day occurring right on the open. Is the market always in long on the close of this bar or this bar? Probably not. But by the time this bar closes back up near the high of the day, three consecutive bull bars, two with very big bull bodies. A second entry for a failed breakout below yesterday's low. By the close of this bar, the market's always in long. And traders believe we've seen the low of the day. It turns out the market did not get back above the close of that bar or it did not close above the close of that bar. But we knew that the odds were at this point, we were not going down here. We have a higher low major trend reversal, 40% chance of a swing up, 60% chance of a small profit or a small loss. And that's what the traders got. Trading range, late and a bear trend. Probably going to be the final bear flag if the bears get a bear breakout. The bulls are trying to get a double bottom here, break above the neckline, measure to move up. And the market opened below that close. The bulls who bought that close are now trapped. The market sold off sharply. And then strong bulls bought on the reversal up, betting on low of the day. We have a big gap up and we sold off on the open and we sold off on a small pullback bear trend through here. And now the market's accelerating down. We have four consecutive bear bars closing near their lows, breaking below this low two short. Low one, pullback low two, a tight range. Do you think this is the start of an even stronger bear trend? Here we are maybe 60 bars into the day and we're starting to accelerate down. Or do you think it's more likely a cell vacuum test of support? One area of support, yesterday's closed, yesterday is low. And this is probably more likely a cell vacuum test of support. It's a strong enough sell off so that it's probably going to have at least a small second leg down. And this is a small second leg down. The bulls broke above the tight bear micro channel. And the bears tried to resume down, but all they got was one bar. And then the market reversed up. Ultimately, the bears got a double top and a break below the neckline of that double top. And a sell off down to yesterday's close at the end of the day. However, at this point, you have to be thinking that it's not likely to be a measuring gap. It's more likely to be a bear trap trapping traders into believing the bear trend is going to accelerate down. After the market sells off for 60 bars like this late in the day, especially when the sell off has a lot of sideways trading, traders typically look to lighten up. They look to take partial profits. And therefore, if you get a sudden big breakout, a lot of the bears are going to say, wow, there should be some short covering at the end of the day. Bears will take profits. And here we're getting an opportunity to buy back our shorts at a very low price. It's probably not going to last long. And the bears bought back shorts. Ultimately, other bears decided that we have a gap bar, first bars with lows above the moving average, gap between the moving average and the lows of the bars, betting that we would get at least a test back down. So other bears sold again here. If you want, you can call this a wedge bottom. One, pullback. Two, pullback. Three. A test of yesterday's close, even though not quite there. We're trying to get a bear break up below the bear channel. Usually, you'd expect it to fail. A lot of bulls would buy the first reversal up or the second reversal up. Some would buy the close of the bull body right there or the close of that bull body, betting that it's the start of a reversal up. When the channel is this tight, is the market going to reverse into a bull trend? No, it's probably going to reverse into a trading range. However, it's reasonable to buy looking for a test of the most recent major lower high, which is the top of this sell climax. And you can see traders took profits there and bears sold again up there. When you're buying in a tight channel, you're buying for a scalp because the reversal up is going to be minor. And then probably 70% chance, 80% chance it's going to be minor. And that means you'll get a test back down. You might then get a major reversal or you might get a resumption of the bear trend. The bulls have bought here. Disappointing entry bar here. Bad follow through here. Good breakout here, but small bar here. Gap bars late in a trend. Usually the market will try to resume down one more time. The initial goal for the bulls was the scalp up to the top of the sell climax. And you can see once it got there, the bars started getting small. We started getting dojis. The bulls are selling out of their lungs to take profits. They lack conviction. The bears see the lack of strength up here and they start to sell again, betting that these gap bars, while a sign of strong bulls, will not be enough to reverse the trend without first testing the low of the bear trend. Higher low major trend reversal, but not really. Not enough bars down, maybe enough bars up. Also, when you get three decent bear bars like this, the odds are there'll be sellers above and you'll get at least a second leg down. And therefore this is not a very good buy. Now this is a very good sell. You can argue it's, I don't know, is that eight bars without a pullback? So it's an eight bar bull micro channel. First reversal down minor. Usually you get a second leg sideways to up. And the bulls got their second leg sideways to up. A lower high. And then the bears got a second leg down from this climax. For the bears, a double top with this high and that bar. A double top with this high and that high. Reasonable sell. We have a bear bar here. The market's evolving from bull bars to weaker bull bars to doji bars and now bear bars. A reasonable swing short looking for one leg down. Gap bars usually lead to the final leg of the bear trend before the market attempts to form a major trend reversal. This could turn out to be a scalp. It's a reasonable swing. We're running out of time in the day. We only have about 10 bars left. But sometimes you'll get pretty good selling and the result could be a swing. Here it does not look like much, but it's actually 10 points or so in the final hour. So that is a swing short. We have a reversal up. And we're stalling at the top of this trading range. And you can also call it a wedge. One, two, three. Or a double top and a bull breakout that might fail. This is probably a final flag top. We have a reversal up and then a trading range. And then a breakout. Big tails, big tails, testing a prior high. Probably going to be a trading range. 60% chance of the end of the rally for at least 10 or more bars. And possibly a reversal down. Only 40% chance this is going to lead to a measured move up. This close is at or above the top of this tight trading range. And at or above the top of the past 30 bars or so. And then we have a bull bar follow through. However, the big tails on top of both make it likely that we're going to go sideways to down for at least 10 bars. It's still a possible bull breakout and follow through and measuring gap. 40% chance we get the measured move up. 60% chance we go sideways or down. Some bears will sell the close of that follow through bar. Both bars with big tails, possible final flag. Test of the top of the range. A reasonable sell. However, if they did take the sell and the market tried to reverse up here and now it's trying to reverse up a second time. The bears will exit taking their loss because they're afraid that instead of an exhaustion gap, this could be a measuring gap. Here's an attempt by the bears to reverse and look at the low of this bar and the high of all of these bars. This is only a test of the breakout point, not a reversal. And it's not closing the gap. In fact, it's creating a gap between this low and that high. That increases the chances that this gap between that low and this high will be a measuring gap and then we'll get a measured move up. Minimum would be a measured move based upon the height of this trading range, but possibly a measured move based upon the height of this entire rally, which could be a bear leg in a trading range today or a large bear flag. Bear trend with a deep pullback. We might continue all the way down. The bulls know the bears failed. The bulls know the tails up here are bad, but they know a lot of bears will get out above this bar, a high one. And now we have a bull inside bar after this bar. It's a type of high two. What this is, is possibly a bull flag. And then this bull doji bar is the breakout. This inside bar is the pullback. So it's a small bull trend, bull flag, breakout and pullback. The bears will give up and the bulls will buy, betting that this low is testing that high and that we have an open gap and that we're going up for a measured move. And that's what ended up happening. We got our measured move up based upon the entire rally. Even though the breakout has a big tail, the follow through has a big tail and the follow through after that is not all that good. You got to look at the reversal attempt by the bears. A tail on the bottom and did not get below the breakout point. And the bears tried again a second time. Tail on the bottom did not get below the breakout point. The bears are going to buy back their shorts. And the bulls are now confident that this sell off attempt is simply a test of the breakout. It's a breakout test and that we're probably going at least a little higher. We went a lot higher. Whenever the market has a credible top, but it fails and the market starts to go up, the swing stop for the bulls is below the bottom of the bull swing or below the bottom of the breakout. So if you're buying here or here, your stop theoretically is here or here. However, since this is a breakout test and a micro double bottom and the bulls have a gap that's staying open, it's also reasonable to use a very tight stop right below the low of this breakout test bar. This is an attempt by the bears to make this be an exhaustion gap and the end of a bull trend. And they could not close the gap. They could not get below the breakout point. And that's important for the bulls. And now the market's resuming up. The bulls expect that it'll be able to hold above this low. If it falls below this low, they'll change their mind. They'll stop thinking about this as a possible measuring gap. And they'll think that maybe we're in a trading range. Maybe we'll test down to the buy climax low and maybe all the way down to the low of the day. And therefore, some bulls will use the tighter stop. Reasonable below the buy climax below the low of the day. Because once it starts to reverse up here, the probability is high that traders will make at least a measured move up. It's reasonable to take profits at one times actual risk. The actual risk is small. For example, if you bought above the high of this bar, by the close of this bar, you know that your actual risk is small. Maybe a point or so. It's from just above the high of this bar where you entered to just below the low of that bar. That's how much you actually had to risk to make all this money. And when the actual risk is small, going for a reward equal to one times the actual risk, usually not good. You should go for a bigger reward based upon some other measurement of target or some other resistance. However, when you have a high probability of buy, and at this point the probability is high that you're going to make money, at least as much as you're risking, you have a positive traders equation. And it's okay to take profit at one times your actual risk. But just because it's okay, does not mean it's sensible. Here, we're probably going up higher, much more than just one times actual risk. And it's better to hold on and see what happens. And you can see what happened is the market started to enter a bull microchannel. Five bars, 10 bars without a pullback. And therefore the first reversal down probably will be minor. And we're probably going higher still. So a bull buying here would continue to hold even here, betting that we're going up at least a little bit higher. For example, measured move. This was an attempt at a top. We broke above it. We pulled back and we resumed up. Reasonable to expect a measured move up. This is a logical area to take profits. And you can see that's what happened. The bulls stopped buying. Bears started selling, expecting to make at least a scout. Also, a lot of times you get a measured move up based upon the height of the breakout, which is right there. You can see some profit taking there. Two reasonable measured move targets. Therefore, you'd expect some profit taking from the bulls. Especially after all of this climactic buying. The stop is now far away. And the bulls don't want to risk that much. One way to reduce risk is to reduce their position size. Whenever the markets enter trading range, it often accelerates strongly after a first leg up. And then that second leg up has no follow through and in fact leads to a reversal. That's a second leg trap. Trading ranges often have two-legged patterns. We have a weak rally. And now it broke into a very strong rally. So you can call this a wedge rally. You can call it a weak rally. And now the market's trying to transition into a strong bull trend. However, because we're still below the prior highs. 50, 60, 100 bars to the left. It might be a bull leg in a trading range. And whenever you get exceptional strength on a possible second leg up in a trading range, it could be an exhaustive move. A second leg trap. You want to see what the follow through is. And a lot of the bears will sell below the bear bar. And a lot of the bulls will get out. Other traders will wait to see if we get two, three, or four bear bars. And then they'll start to sell closes or above the high of the prior bar. Higher probability to sell after you've seen three or four decent bear bars closing on their lows. But taking the later sell, you get higher probability. You pay for it with a stop that's further away. It's reasonable to take the early sell. Here we have an II and a bear bar. Or it's also reasonable to take the later sell. This sell has smaller risk, lower probability. This sell has greater risk and higher probability. Both are reasonable. Big down, big up, big confusion, probable trading range. And when you have a probable trading range, 80% of breakout attempts fail. Therefore, you should not be looking to buy at the low of this bar, betting that we're going to get a second leg up. This little bull bar was probably the second leg up. You had buy the close bulls who bought this close. They bought this close. And then they saw this bear bar and they said, Uh oh, that's bad. That's bad. That's disappointing. Maybe I should just get out and look to see what happens over the next several bars. The bulls have bought this close, disappointed by this bar. A lot of them placed limit orders to get out break even. And look at this bar. It got up to that close and not above it. And the bulls who tried to sell out of their lungs at their original entry price are now trapped. And they'll start to sell on a reversal down. And this is a pair of give up bars. The bulls giving up. The bears understand that as well. And they're going to sell. Once they see that the bulls are trapped, they could not get out at the high of this bar. They know the bulls will get out lower. And therefore the bears sell as well. If you're a bull and you're seeing this exceptionally strong breakout. And you did not buy lower and you're hoping to buy. I would not be buying with a limit order with that bad follow through. And then seeing that the high of this bar could not get above the close of that bar. And that this high is below the top of all the bars to the left. Too much risk that it's a second leg trap in what will become a big trading range. Strong enough breakout. Probably buyers below. And the best the bears get will be a trading range. Instead of a bear trend. But I would wait to buy with a stop after I see the market stabilize. And here it never stabilized until all the way down. Just below the bottom of the buy climax. The bears understand what's going on as well. And a lot of them will take a swing short. Here it would be a swing short. It's 15 points down to this low. So a lot of them will sell. Taking a chance that we'll get two legs down after the buy climax. Also because it's a trading range. You'd expect a lot of two legged moves. Bear breakout. Pull back two. So one pull back two. One. It tried to be one. Tried to be one. Tried to be one. Tried to be one. Tried to be one. And now we're accelerating. Changing the character of the market. So one here is a wedge. It was a wedge here. Now it's a bigger wedge. And then two is this breakout. And then on the way down, one pull back two. If you take this short, your stop was either above the top of the II, especially since there's a good bear bar closing below its midpoint or above the top of the buy climax. And if you get stopped out and it reverses again, you'd sell the second entry as well. Reasonable to take partial profits at the bottom of the buy climax. And you can see that's what happened. A lot of the bears who shorted are betting that it's big up, big down, big confusion and probably going to be a trading range. And therefore they want to buy back their shorts low. They want to buy low. And the bulls know that as well. And the bulls are looking to buy in the area of the bottom of the buy climax if you get some kind of reversal. We have a micro double bottom, a bull bar closing on its high. Reasonable for the bulls to buy for at least a scalp. Look at this. We have a bull trend and we entered a trading range for about 15 bars. Now the bull trend is trying to resume. It's a bull micro channel, good for the bulls. But where are the consecutive big bull trend bars? Not present. And therefore this is a fairly weak rally. Small bars, a lot of overlap coming out of a tight trading range, failing to break strongly above a significant prior high. Whenever you get a weak rally, you have to assume it's probably going to be a bull leg in what will become a trading range instead of the start of a strong bull trend. And if it's a bull leg in the trading range, a lot of traders will sell a failed breakout and a reversal down. This was a test of yesterday's close and yesterday's high. And we have a little bigger bar here. So it's a bi-climax trying to break above the top of the channel. And now we're getting a reversal down. Two bar reversal up and then reversing down, closing on its low. Might test the bottom of the range. Okay to sell for a scalp down to the bottom of the range. This is also a trading range, late in a bull trend, and therefore potentially a final bull flag. And sometimes a final bull flag has a breakout that fails to get above the prior high. Here it looks like we got right around to the prior high, right around to yesterday's close. And sometimes that's all that the bulls get in terms of trend resumption before the breakout fails. Bull flag, late in a bull trend, tight trading range, possible magnet, and possible final flag. So if we get a breakout, especially one that's not very strong, even though it's climactic, it's probably not going to go very far. Reversal down, it's after maybe an 8 or 10 bar bull micro channel. Probably the reversal down is not going to be all that dramatic either. Not much energy going up. Probably not much energy here. Also not much energy for the first couple of hours today. So just as this was a bull leg in a trading range, probably the reversal down will be a bear leg in a trading range. It's a double top major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout. Double top, maybe a slightly higher high major trend reversal. But with a 8 or 10 bar bull micro channel, a bull body for the sell signal bar, probably will have to go sideways before the bears can get it to go down. And even though it went down for a second leg, it never went down very strongly. Had you sold here, traders will look for a scalp. Even though it's a possible higher high or a double top major trend reversal, with a decent sell signal bar and a decent entry bar, look at the follow through doji, big tail and small body, not a strong breakout below the range. A lot of the bears will decide that this is probably a bear leg in a trading range. Rather than swing trading, hoping for a trend reversal, it's more likely the market's going to go sideways. And therefore they're scalping. They're looking to take profits around the bottom of the range and certainly on the reversal up. Either above this bar, high two, high one right here. And then high two, double bottom here or above this bar. This is a double top. I can't tell. It might be a slightly higher high major trend reversal. Usually followed by a lower high major trend reversal. And this is a lower high major trend reversal. However, there's very little energy. The market's 30 bars into the day, 40 bars into the day. All the bars are small. The follow through is bad. More likely, any reversal attempt will lead to a brief move down and then the trading range will resume. The bears who sold this, they have to buy back here. They have a bear breakout, bad follow through, a bull bar. They have a bear breakout, even better bull bar. So a failed breakout below the low of the past four hours and a decent buy signal bar, the bears will give up. They'll take profits and the bulls will buy for a scalp up. Two legs down, one and then pull back and then two. We have a series of cell climaxes. Remember, every bear trend bar is a breakout and a climax. We have a cell climax here, again here, here and here. And what do you notice? A bear bar, but where's the follow through? It's a doji bar. A bear bar here and then we get a bull bar. A pair of bear bars, not all that big, and then a bull doji. Another pair of bear bars and now we're getting a big bull bar. And we're reversing up near yesterday's high, yesterday's close and the 60-minute moving average. This might be a parabolic cell climax, vacuum test of support. Is it likely to reverse up and become a bull trend? No, but it's likely not to go much further down and probably will attract some profit taking. After a series of cell climaxes, especially after you've had three, four or five of them, the odds are it's not going to fall much further and it'll start to evolve into a trading range. The best pair of bear bars, about 15 or 20 bars into the bear trend, and it's that support, 60-minute moving average. Yesterday's close, yesterday's high. Probably soon we'll get 10 bars and two legs sideways to up. Reasonable to buy above the high of the spool bar. You can either put your stop below or a measured move down and buy more at that low if you'd like. What are the chances that this strong sell-off is going to become a V bottom and lead to a big reversal up? Small. A very tight bear channel. Probably the best the bulls can get is a bull leg and what will become a trading range. Sometimes you get a surprise and you get a big reversal. Usually you only get it after at least a micro double bottom. We have a bottom here. The bear has tried to resume down here and therefore we have a micro double bottom with these lows. And we have a decent reversal up. A much bigger rally than I think what was likely, but sometimes you still get it. Once you get a big bull bar and then a follow-through bull bar, the market's probably going to rally for some kind of a measured move up, which would take the market up to the top of the sell climax. If a trader bought this and scalped out and he saw this pair of bull bars, he should try to buy again. The second buy signal bar, either above that bear bar or above the bull bar. Micro double bottom. The bears tried to reverse down low one, low two. They could not even trigger the low two. Probably going at least up to the top of the most recent sell climax. We might get all the way to the top of the entire sell climax. By the close of this bar, it looks like the market's going to go higher. It's always in long at this point. Consecutive strong bull bars, consecutive strong bull bars. Even with the bad follow-through, we're probably going to get some kind of a measured move up, maybe testing the high of the bay. The rally has the same problem that the sell have had. A series of trend bars with bad follow-through. And for the bulls, a bull bar, bear bar. Bull bar, bear bar. Two bull bars, bear bar. Two bull bars, doji. And this is pretty much the exact opposite of what the bears had. A series of sell climaxes with bad follow-through after each climax. A series of bi-climaxes with bad follow-through after each bi-climax. Probably limited upside. Here, we're at the end of the day. So, whatever follow-through we're going to get, or whatever reversal we're going to get, will come tomorrow. I talked about minor reversals today. Minor climactic reversals. They're more likely to result in a pause in the trend. And then after the pause, after 10 bars or so, the market decides whether to resume or reverse. They usually do not lead to major reversals. Although, sometimes they can. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of three videos on trading climactic reversals. that page will be divided. We will show you Te complimenti, who might be on trading as a Sau and how to apply it to這一 amount of nied eventually. The members watching Auschwitz lapis Radicals TerencePlayer to follow us on trends in this Showstore. If that Knowing Out is a 들어가, we will send you back to homage to this. What's the search? Okay,どうでしょう?