 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on Forex Basics. In this video, I'm going to be talking about the margins and how you can trade greatly levered positions. And then I'm also going to be talking about profit and loss. A lot of what's in this video is not important in terms of trading, but you have to have some familiarity with some of it. And what a margin is, is simply a good faith deposit that allows you to open a position. It's not a fee. It's not a commission. It's calculated on the base currency. So for example, if you're trading the euro versus dollar pair, the margin is 2% of the euro. If the broker says your margin is 2%. What that means is, for every 10 euros in your account, you can trade up to 500 euros in a position. And this is because, although the charts look like they move a lot, on a percentage basis, Forex charts do not move much at all. Here's an example. Let's say you bought 100,000 of the dollar versus the yen. And let's say your fill price is 104.041. Margin is 2% of the base currency. In this case, the dollar. And if you're trading 100,000 units, $100,000, 2% of 100,000 is $2,000. So if you had $2,000 in your account and your broker was allowing you to trade with a 50 to 1 leverage, 50 to 1 margin, 2% margin, then your $2,000 would allow you to buy a $100,000 yen. Here's an example with the euro versus the dollar. And let's say you wanted to buy 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar. And let's say your fill price was here, 1.31275. And let's say your broker currently is allowing you to trade with only a 2% margin. That's 2% of the base currency, which is the euro, the first of the two terms. 100,000 units times 1.31275 dollars per euro equals $131,275. So a 2% margin, if you have a U.S. brokerage account, 2% of that is about $2,600. If you want to trade 100,000 euro versus the dollar, you need at least $2,600 in your account. Every now and then, if a currency pair moves a lot, the broker will reduce the leverage and increase the margin. So instead of 2% margin, which allows you to trade 50 to 1, you might raise the margin to 4%. And if it's 4%, that means your position size can be 25 times greater than your money in your account. Now margins are much smaller than for non-forex markets, for example, the e-mini. And that's because, as I said earlier, forex markets usually move less on a percentage basis. Now 50 to 1, that means 1 out of 50. So 50 to 1 leverage is 1 out of 50, that's 2%. That means for every $200 in your account, you can trade a position that's $10,000 in value. Now, if you have a $200 account, you should not be trading $10,000. You should not be trading your entire account. However, theoretically, your broker would allow it. Now I want to talk a little bit about profit and loss. And in this section of slides, I'm not going to say everything that is on each slide because it's boring. And you don't need to know all the details to trade properly. But if you are curious about the details, you can pause the video and read the details. Okay. The profit or loss on a trade is based upon the quote currency, not the base currency. For example, here, Euro versus the dollar. The dollar is the quote currency. The Euro is the base currency. At the end of the day, your trade is converted into your account currency at the end of the session. So if you're in the United States, it's going to be converted into dollars. In this particular case, since the dollar is the quote currency, there's no conversion to be made. On the other hand, let's say you're in the United States and you're trading the Euro versus the Yen cross. Your native account is US dollars. And at the end of the day, if you have a profit, it's in Yen. Your broker will sell the Yen at the bid into dollars. If you have a loss at the end of the day, the broker will buy Yen at the ask in dollars to cover your loss. At the end of the day, there's a rollover that takes place. A lot of brokers do this. I don't know if all brokers do this. But all positions, at least theoretically, are closed. And then they're opened automatically. They're rolled over for the next trading day, which begins just a few minutes later, except on a Friday. The next trading day is Sunday. There's a type of trade that you'll sometimes hear, but it really has nothing to do with you or me. As traders, and that is a carry trade. And it's an interest rate trade. Traders buy a currency or a bond with a higher interest rate, and then they sell another currency or bond with a lower interest rate. So they pay the lower interest rate and then they collect the higher interest rate. And they're hoping that the currency stay around the same level or that they do not move in the wrong way because you don't want the value of the currency pair that you're hoping to profit on. The higher interest rate currency, you don't want to drop drastically in value because then whatever you're making on the higher interest rate, you're losing on the currency. So in a carry trade, the difference between the interest that you're collecting and the interest that you're paying is your profit. As I said, you'll hear the carry trade mentioned fairly regularly in reference to currency trading, but it has nothing to do with us. It's a long term strategy that is used for institutions, not individuals. And again, as I said, it only works if the exchange rate is stable or if the Forex price moves in your direction. Another reason for me to bring up the carry trade is because it affects the roll price. For example, let's say you're long 100,000 units of the Australian dollar versus the Swiss franc. Okay, and let's say if the rate rolls at $3.20 for longs and minus $6.10 for shorts. Then $3.20 is added to your account on the open of the next session. And if it's a Friday, you get three days worth of interest, $9.60. If you were short 100,000 units of the Australian dollar versus the Swiss franc, $6.10 would be debited. Now, this is what I was talking about when I started this video, that there's math here coming up. And you do not need to know any of this to be a Forex trader. However, if you're curious, I put the math here. And I'll just leave this slide on for a moment in case you're curious. If you're not curious, you can just advance. So here's an example of 100,000 units of the euro versus the dollar. If you sold at $131.81 and then you bought back at $1.3171. Theoretically, you have a 10-pip profit. You know, 100,000 units. This is the math that takes you to the $100 profit. Another example, let's say you bought 100,000 units of the dollar versus the yen. And you bought it at 103.80 and you sold it at 104.11. And if you did the conversion, you had 31 pips profit and that would be about a $300 profit. And one final example, 100,000 units of the euro versus the yen. If you bought it at 136.80 and sold it at 137.90, right, and you did the math, you'd have about $1,000 profit. Again, you're not going to sit down and do these calculations. There are profit calculators online, pip calculators online. A lot of the brokers provide them when you open your account. And this just gives you the math that's behind it. When you're trading, you've got to be thinking about trading. You can't be doing all of these conversions. So in this video, I talked about margins and how they are small compared to when you trade stocks or futures. And I also talked a little bit about the math for profit and loss calculations. And it's nice to know the math, but it's not at all necessary to trade. And most traders don't pay any attention to the math. This is Al Brooks. And thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth and final video on Forex Basics. And we're seeing an infinite amount of calculations, such as if Ha forecast, but the adapter is simply no long. You can always expect those from the books to always be written in one or one. Unfortunately, we project the post catalogs on slightly fear except our cabinets.