 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of five videos on support and resistance. I'll first begin by talking about what I mean by support and resistance. I'll make the important point that it's support and resistance that controls price, not news. You need to use the stop that is based upon the timeframe that you're watching. For example, if you're trading a monthly chart, use stops based upon the monthly chart. Also, because computers dominate trading, support and resistance is usually precise. Support is a price below the market. It's a price where buyers might be stronger than sellers. In other words, it's a price where selling tends to stop and buying tends to take hold and you often can rally. The market rallied at this price here. It rallied at this price here. When it gets down to that general area, you have to assume the bulls will buy again, just like they bought here and here. And therefore, traders use the term support to describe this area. And bears keep selling around this price. They sold here. They sold here. They sold here. They sold here. They sold here. They sold here. They sold here. They sold here. And chances are, when the market gets near this zone again, they'll sell. It doesn't matter what the price is. You don't even have to know why the market might be selling there. All you have to know is every time it gets to this price level, the market has a hard time getting through it. This price level is resisting rallies. Therefore, it's resistance. Traders call support and resistance inflection points because when the market gets to a support or resistance level, it can either break through it or reverse. The market is making a decision. The term used for those areas where the market is deciding whether to reverse or resume is an inflection point. There's a potential for a big move. The bulls bought a couple times here. They bought a little bit above it here. But look what happened when it came down and tested it this time. It broke strongly below it. Whenever the market approaches some prior level, a support level, you have to be ready for the possibility of either a reversal back up or a strong break below. Here, the market broke strongly below support at the bottom of a trading range. The market sold off. It bounced. When it got near this high, it sold off again. When it got near this high, it sold off again. These prior highs then are resistance. Look what happened here. We had a reversal up. We have another reversal up. I can draw a line. I want to see what the market will do if it gets near that line again. Will it strongly break through it or will it reverse up? Here, we started to reverse up. So traders will buy on the reversal up. That line is supporting the market. Why should you spend time looking for support and resistance when the market's in a trend? It's because of my 80% rule. 80% of the time, a strong bear trend will not stop at support. Likewise, a strong bull trend will not stop at resistance. The market has inertia. It tends to do what it has been doing. And that means that if the market's in a strong bear trend, every time you see a possible support level, you have to assume the support will break and the market will continue down. Instead of a lot of buying at the prior low, the market continued down. Instead of buying at that low, the market continued down. The market's trying to reverse a decent looking bull bar. Try to reverse a second time. Here, a small double bottom. Another reversal. Another reversal. 80% of reversal attempts in a strong bear trend will fail. And they'll fail at some kind of resistance level like the bear trend line. And they'll then become bear flags. So instead of a reversal, this rally becomes a bear flag. The market breaks to the downside and the bear trend resumes. Traders draw trend lines. And they look to sell reversals down from the trend line. Betting that the trend reversal attempts up will fail. And that each bull reversal attempt will become a bear flag. And the bear trend will resume. Traders will also sell strong bear trend bars. Closing below prior lows. Betting that the breakout will have follow through selling. We have a strong bear breakout below this low. And then the next bar is a bear bar as well. So they'll sell that. Betting that the bear trend will continue down. They'll bet that the support of the prior low will fail. Top of the channel. This channel is a parallel of this line. I could have simply drawn a line across this line. And that high. But in any case, the market hit the top of the channel. And we have a bear bar. Traders will sell below that bear bar. Betting that this reversal attempt will fail. And the bear trend will resume. The bear trend line is resistance. Every trend reversal takes place at support and resistance. Whether or not you see the support or resistance. If there's a reversal, there is support or resistance there. If the market's reversing up, it's at some support. A measured move. A trend line. If the market's reversing down, there's some resistance. For example, the top of a bear channel. The market reversed up here. But look at this. This pullback failed to get above that high. This is a very big bear breakout with follow-through. It might be a measuring gap. Traders will pay attention to that. And they'll look at either the midpoint of the gap between this high and that low. Or simply this low. And project a measured move down. And then see what the market does when it gets near there. A measured move target is support. Late in a bear trend like this, traders expect some kind of transition into a trading range. They'll look for support levels. And one support level is based upon a bear trend. If the market is a bear trend, which is a low trend, is to look at support levels. So if the market is a bear trend, they're going to expect some kind of transition into a trading range. for support levels, and one support level is based upon a measuring gap. Three pushes down, one, two, and then up, and then three, or one and two, up and three. Parabolic wedge cell climax at a measured move target. Higher probability of at least a minor reversal into a trading range. A good location to take profits. Aggressive bulls would buy there. If I extended this channel down further, this would also be at the bottom of the channel. Support, always a good location for taking full or partial profits. And aggressive traders will buy, but a very tight bare channel like this, probably a minor reversal into a trading range. Here's the trading range. Now why should anyone pay attention to support and resistance in a trading range? Again, my 80% rule. When the market's in a strong trend, 80% of reversal attempts will fail. When the market's in a trading range, 80% of breakout attempts into a trend will fail. Breakout attempts will fail at support and resistance. Obvious resistance at the top of the trading range. Obvious support at the bottom of the trading range. You have to expect that a bear breakout will fail. Because they expect breakouts to fail, they look to buy low and they look to sell high. They expect breakouts to fail, so they expect the sell-off to be limited and they expect the rally to be limited. And therefore they take quick profits. They scalp. They buy low, sell high and scalp. Top of the trading range is resistance. So traders sell. Bears sell to initiate positions. Bulls sell to take profits. If a bull buys down here, he's going to be taking profits somewhere in the middle or top half of the trading range, certainly on a reversal down. If a bear sells here, he's going to be taking profits in the middle or bottom of the trading range, certainly on a reversal up. Bulls will get long at the bottom, reversal up. Bears will get short at the top, reversal down. Especially second entry sells. First entry, second entry. First entry, second entry buy. Higher probability if there's a second entry. Markets exist to make trading easy. Institutions created markets because they wanted trading to be easy. If you're a buyer, you need a seller. If you're a seller, you need a buyer. It's much easier to find the opposite side of a trade if everyone agrees to be participating in a market. If there's no market, you have to go door to door to find someone who's going to take the opposite side of your trade. As a corollary, markets always try to maximize the number of trades and the trading volume. Markets are constantly searching for a price where most of the trading will take place. It never knows the exact price. The fair price constantly changes. There are countless variables entering the market at all times. And that means the fair price, the exact fair price, is existing only for a second or so. It's constantly changing. Markets usually have to go too far down to find out how far down is far enough. And they usually have to go up too far to find out how far up is far enough. And then they oscillate in a fair price range. Most of the time, the markets are in some kind of a range, a band of where they think the prices are fair. The bulls feel like it's good enough price to buy. The bears feel like it's good enough price to sell. If you think about it, if the price just kept going down and down and down, at some point, the bears would decide, I don't want to sell theirs too low. If the market kept going up and up and up and up, at some point, the bulls will say, huh, I don't know, this is, this is way too expensive. I don't want to buy here. I'll wait for a pullback. And the volume dries up and the market will have to pull back to find buyers. Support and resistance, it constantly pulls the market. The market is constantly trying to find out if there are more buyers or sellers at support or resistance. Will one side give up? Will there be a breakout or a reversal? Look at this. The bears sell, they sell, they sell, they sell, they sell. This is resistance. You know it because by definition, if the market goes for a certain price and sells off, that's what resistance means. Traders call that resistance. When the market does it repeatedly, it becomes more reliable resistance. The next time the market gets there, traders are more confident that the sellers will return again. Bulls buying in a tight channel, but then we get a big breakout below the trend line. This trend line was support. I could have drawn the line across these lows, but I'll draw it across here. This clearly means the bulls are no longer able to support the market at the trend line. The market has to go lower to find a price where bulls will buy again. The bulls are giving up. A give up bar, a bear breakout below the bottom of the channel. The bulls are selling out of their longs and bears are selling as well. They see what's going on. They see the break below the trend line. They see a buy climax and a second buy climax, possibly a second leg trap. The biggest bull bar in 15 bars or so, possibly the end of the trend. Second entry short, one, two, higher probability for a reversal down. Bulls sell out of longs. Bears sell into shorts. All markets are constantly in search of the fair price. It usually has to probe too far up and too far down to find the band of fair prices. And then it probes in the opposite direction. Bulls trying to continue higher, but every time it goes up, it goes down, up, down, up, down, tails on the tops of bars. Maybe the market has to go lower to find buyers. It looks like we're running out of buyers at this price, and it looks like sellers are very eager to sell. This might be the top. Big bear break up, but not good follow through and a reversal up in an area where bulls bought previously. Not enough traders willing to sell at this price. The market probably has to go higher to find sellers. This, therefore, is a support zone. If you listen to television, you're listening to news reporters. They believe everything takes place because of the news. But most of what they say is caused by the news has nothing to do with the news. It's just a coincidence. Support and resistance is the single most important force behind market movement. Markets are constantly probing support and resistance, trying to find a fair price level or a zone of fair prices. And that's the single most important thing that traders have to learn. It's not the news. It's support and resistance. The market's in search of a fair price zone. Markets are constantly looking for the stock market. When you see this, this could be a daily chart. Five minute chart, doesn't matter. The news is going to see the stock market went down. They'll look for some news and they'll say the news caused the stock market to go down. That's nonsense. The stock market went down because it's been probing up and it's unable to go up. And therefore, it usually has to go in the opposite direction. It's deciding that this is the top of the range of fair prices and it's looking for the bottom of the range of fair prices. It sold off to an area of a prior low. They bought here. They bought here. We're down to that level again. They bought here and they bought again here. They found buyers at the bottom of the range. What happened to the news? If this was due to news, what happened here? It's not news. It's the market in search of a fair range of prices. Television likes to say news causes moves. It does not. It sometimes can be a catalyst that begins a move, but any move that you see is simply a probe of support and resistance. The market looking for fair price. This is a monthly chart of the dollar versus the yen. Without knowing the news, I'm assuming this is going to go up. We have a bear channel on the monthly chart and it's getting very tight. The trend line and the trend channel line, it looks like a wedge bottom. 75% chance there's going to be a bull breakout. That means 75% chance. Soon, the news will report some event and claim that it was responsible for this bull breakout. That's nonsense. The market's telling us that it's going down too far. It's running out of sellers at this price. It's going to have to reverse up to find sellers. We know that when the market's in the spike pullback channel, 75% chance you're going to get a bull breakout and then either a trading range or a bull trend. And during this breakout and this breakout, I'm sure there was news, but the market was going to do that regardless of what the news was. Fundamental factors lead to trends that can last for years. Here's a bear trend that lasted for five or six years. Here's a bull trend that lasted for three or four years. Ultimately, the market's controlled by fundamentals. But any given move that you see on the chart, it's a probe for a range of fair price. Especially short-term moves over the course of weeks to months, it's not news. It's fundamentals. The market probing for a fair price, looking for support and resistance. Support and resistance, always important. And it creates a lot of trading opportunities. But you have to know where it is. You have to be looking for it and you have to be looking for patterns. We have a wedge bear channel, 75% chance we'll get a bull breakout and the conversion into either a trading range or a bull trend. I'm much more interested in the technical setup. This is telling us that the market is finding support at this area and it's probably too low and we're probably going to go up higher. It doesn't matter what the news is. The chart is telling us that the market's going to go up. So is the chart telling us that there's going to be a news event? You know, who cares? All I know is when I see that, I expect the market to go up. Wedge bear channel, bull breakout, higher or low, major trend reversal, and then strong bull breakout. The bull bars closing on their highs, the bull bars getting bigger. We're going higher. We're going to go up higher. This was a support level. The market rallied from there and we broke below it. Reversed up. This pulled back to test that level. So this is an important price. Important price usually leads to a measured move. From this high to that important price, this is a measured move area. It's probably a support level. So now we have a wedge bottom at a measured move target. Higher probability that we'll get at least a bounce. Monthly charts. You need monthly stops. Stops based upon the monthly chart. And the monthly chart of the dollar versus the yen. If you're trading on the monthly chart, use stops based upon the monthly chart. Don't go looking at the daily chart or five minute chart for your stops. Here's the five minute chart. If you're trading that monthly chart and you happen to look at the five minute chart, ignore the moves on the five minute chart. Only pay attention to the monthly chart. Very often a lower time frame chart or a higher time frame chart will be doing the exact opposite of what you're seeing on the chart you're trying to trade. If you're trading on this chart, only pay attention to this chart. Here we have a very strong bull trend and a pullback. We have an II that makes it a high one bull flag. And it's the first buy signal in three months other than buying closes. This is the five minute chart and this price corresponds exactly to that price. This is the entry for the breakout on the monthly chart above the II. If you're day trading, you look for setups on the five minute chart. You cannot wait three months for a buy signal on the monthly chart. So if you're trading on the five minute chart, ignore the monthly chart, just trade the five minute chart. On the other hand, if you're trading the monthly chart, ignore the five minute chart and just place your trades based upon what's going on with the monthly chart. Very often you'll see a big move or any kind of a move or a reversal on a five minute chart. And it's caused by support and resistance on other time frames. Since reversals on higher time frames occur much less often, if you're trading the five minute chart, in general, it's not worth paying attention to the higher time frame charts. The signals on the higher time frame charts are so infrequent that you'll be wasting your time. There are far more signals that you'll see on the five minute chart alone. Again, most of the moves that you see on any chart are due to the support and resistance on the chart in front of you. It may correspond with support and resistance on a higher time frame or a lower time frame chart. But usually there's something on the chart that you see that will tell you that there's support or resistance and it will tell you how to trade without looking at other charts. So don't worry about other charts. Strong bull breakout bar, very big bull bar closing on its high, closing well above the high of the prior bars. And then the following bar is a bull bar as well. High probability, 60% chance you'll get some kind of a measured move up based upon the size of this breakout. Any resistance, any minor resistance will fail and you have to find any reason to get long. The breakout is racing up to test resistance. It's decided that the price level is too low, so it's in search of a higher price and it expects that there'll be at least some profit taking at resistance. Whenever I see a big bull bar like that, and I think the odds are it's going to lead to a trend, I pay attention to the open of the bar and the close of the bar, and then I project up to a measured move. A lot of traders will take profits there. At this point, 60% chance we're going higher. At this point, the stop is below here. 60% chance that if you risk this much, you'll get that much. And that results in profit taking around a measured move up. We tried to get a top here. Instead, we get another breakout. And this pullback tested this high. Potential measuring gap. The bottom of the bull flag and then the breakout above this attempt at a reversal. Also a measured move up. So we have two measured move projections at this price. And you can see what happened. We have profit taking. Those measured move projections create resistance. You can draw a bull trend line, create a parallel along the top. And you can see we're having a bull breakout above a bull channel. 75% chance it'll fail within five bars and test down to the bottom of the channel. So other resistance at this price level as well. The market was sideways here. It tried to form a high two buy. High one, high two. Decent looking bull bar. Double bottom. It paused. But then we got this big bear bar. And you look at that and say, huh, that shouldn't have happened. That's a surprise. Whenever you get a surprise, you have to assume there'll be at least a small second leg down. When I see a big bar like that, I look at the next bar. Does it have a bull body? No. Increases the probability we're going lower. No bull body. And then we start to reverse here. I look to the left. Is there a gap? This low, this high? There's a gap. This bar might be a measuring gap leading to a measured move down. I'm more confident about selling here. The bulls tried to reverse here. High one, high two. But a possible double top lower high, bear flag, a bear body, makes me think it's worth selling below this bear bar for at least a little bit more down. The market's racing down to support. But what support? Where's the support? Well, a good place to start is looking for a measured move from this high to either this low or the middle of this gap. You can see what happened there. This low reversed up. This low reversed up. Maybe a bear channel and you can draw a trend line across the top. So now we have a wedge bottom and a reversal up at the bottom of the channel. We broke below the channel by a little bit. Now we have a bull bar at a measured move target. That is support. Clearly a trading range, lots of reversals. Trading range. So you buy low, you sell high and you scalp. You sell high and you sell high. You sell high. You sell high. You sell high. You sell high. In general, you should look to sell maybe in the top third, top half, expecting continued resistance and expecting every probe up into that area to fail and lead to a reversal down. That's the sell zone. And in the bottom third, bottom half, you can see every time it gets down to this level, it's reversing up. This is the buy zone. It's support. 80% rule. You have to expect that 80% of breakout attempts will fail even if the breakout attempts are strong. So support and resistance can be very, very precise. It's calculated by computers. It's especially precise for the E-mini, a huge volume market controlled mostly by computers. The data is very reliable. Everybody sees the same prices, unlike Forex markets, where every broker has a different price, slightly different. The result is in the E-mini. The math is very precise and targets are often within one tick of the actual price. Weak rally. Trying to get a double top, reversal down, at the top of a trading range. Instead, we get a breakout. A close above the high of the past 20 bars and then an even bigger bar. Very clear for computers. We have a gap this low, these highs. And they're able to calculate very exact support and resistance targets. We have a reversal up, a reversal up, a trend line. That allows us to create a channel. I just keep dragging it to any price that contains all the bars to the left. And then I look to the right and I see what happens. And it reversed down. So it's reversing down at the top of a channel and at a measured move target. Strong breakout. Expect at least a second leg up. We got the second leg up. And that's the minimum that the bulls needed. And now they see resistance there as well. So you get profit taking. Very precise. Experienced traders all see the support and resistance targets. Everyone agrees on the targets and the decisions that everyone is making. They're using the same information. You have to learn to spot the targets. Reversal down. Possible start of a trend line. Reversal down. Draw a line. And look at this. When it got to the line, it reversed down. Some traders will try to sell with limit orders at the line or tick below. Others will sell on the reversal down. And bulls were long. We'll take profits there. Spike pullback channel. Three pushes. One, two, three. Very often a spike in a channel has three pushes. Bulls will look to take profits around the top of the channel. We gapped down. Tried to sell off. Theoretically, the market wanted to form a double top. It did not. It just kept going up. However, because of a potential double top, you have to be thinking that maybe there's a potential measured move up based upon the height of the sell off. And look at this. Exactly to the tick. Very precise in the E-mini. E-mini and stocks are both controlled by computers. Traders pay a lot of attention to entering and exiting based upon math, where the projections are, where the support and resistance is. If a trader is good at spotting support and resistance, he knows where to take profits, and he knows where to enter trades. I began by talking about what I mean by support and resistance. I made the important point that support and resistance controls price, not news. If you're trading on a monthly chart, use stops based upon the monthly chart, not based upon a smaller time frame. Computers dominate the biggest markets, and therefore the support and resistance is extremely precise, especially in a market like the E-mini. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of five videos on support and resistance. Oh my thank you forении me. Either the essay захfires except the contribution for your loss or attention to your success, or what we call the practitioner at. So please visit tuberculosis where it is seen as many of the references.