 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of seven videos on protective stops. I want to talk a little bit about wide stops in this video. We have a bull trend here and a breakout of bull flag here, possibly an exhaustive end of the move. We have a big bear bar closing on its low, but then we have a two bar reversal down, up, and a good looking bull signal bar. It's a high one by chances are we'll go up at least a little bit higher after this strong bull breakout, despite this attempt to reverse. If you take this by above the high of this bar, you get filled here. You could put your stop right below the bottom of the bar, but the two consecutive bear bars, that could lead to a second or third leg down. So one, pull back two, pull back three. For example, a wedge bull flag, wedge high or low. If you're taking this by, it's probably better to use a wider stop either here or even better here. Why here instead of this? It's a by climax. It could be an exhaustive end of the move, and it's low as a magnet. However, if the market falls below the low of this bar, probably some buyers. If it falls below the low of the entire bull leg, probably the bull trend has ended. Some traders prefer to use a wide stop to have a higher probability of success. In general, a small stop means small risk, and it means a very good risk reward ratio. A good risk reward ratio always means low probability of success. You lose most of the time. Some traders want a high probability of success, and a good way to do that is increase your risk. Use a wider stop. Another way to do it is increase your reward. For example, go for a reward equal to two times your risk or more. Mark is pulling back from the high. We've got the second leg up. First leg pull back, second leg. It could get a third, fourth leg up, but we're starting to pull back here. One leg down, two legs down, three legs down. If you want, you can call it a wedge. You can call it a high two, high one, high two. The bulls have a breakout above the top of this small channel, the wedge bull flag, but it immediately reversed. Once you have a big bear bar closing below the low of the wedge, followed by a second bear bar closing on its low, you're probably going to get a measured move down, a failed breakout below the bottom of the wedge. That would be the minimum objective. At this point, you have six consecutive bear bars, four closing on their lows. This is a give up set of bars. The bulls are giving up and the bears are selling aggressively. The odds are the result will be at least a measured move down. It's a sell the close market. A lot of traders will wait for the breakout bar and wait to see if there's one more bear bar closing near slow, and then they'll solve the close. If you're a bull and you bought here and you did not exit here, I would recommend exiting on the follow through bar after the bear breakout, and don't wait for your stop to be hit. You have a wide stop, but the premise has changed. Instead of a bull trend, the market now is always in short. It's probably going to fall for a measured move down, which means it will hit this and probably this stop as well. Not only should the bulls exit here, and this is a sign that they did exit consecutive bear bars breaking below a wedge bull flag, bears will sell that close as well, and they'll sell low one and low two bear flags. For example, we rallied up here. Traders will sell below the low of this bar and they'll get filled on the bottom of this bar. And now they have a low two short with a bear sell signal bar. They'll sell here as well. Their stop will be above the top of the bear reversal, this bear breakout. The market rallied. We have a strong leg up and a second leg up, possibly a trading range, possibly a second leg trap. It's also an expanding triangle. One, two, three, four, five, with a good bear bar. Bears will sell on the reversal down below that low. You can also draw a channel here and you can say the market's reversing down from the top of a channel. In this particular setup, a price action stop, you'd put it right above the top of this bear reversal bar. Two legs up in a triangle, a good looking bear bar, top of a channel, expanding triangle. If the market goes above the high of this bar, it's probably better to exit because your premise of a triangle top is probably wrong. Reasonable to put a price action stop, a stop based upon the price action, above the top of a strong sell signal bar with a reasonably good sell setup. Most likely, the market will remain in a trading range, but you might get a swing down and it should not get above the high of this bar. If it does get above the high of this bar and reverses down again, traders will stop themselves out and then sell again on the second reversal down. To allow for that possibility, some traders will sell below the low of this bar and they'll get filled here, but they'll use a wider stop, maybe based upon a measured move based upon the height of this bar. Maybe they'll put their stop here, two times the height of the signal bar. Some traders like to use money stops, like a fixed number of ticks or a fixed number of pips from your entry price. Maybe 10 ticks, maybe 20 ticks from the entry price, maybe 10 pips, maybe 20 pips from the entry price. If this were a daily chart or a 60 minute chart, they would use many more pips. Let's say you sold below the low of this bear reversal bar, given expanding triangle, top of the channel, and you did not want to risk to above its high. Instead, you might want to risk to just above the midpoint or you might want to risk exactly 10 ticks or 10 pips. Reasonable choice, but I think a better choice is a stop above the top of the sell signal bar, which is just a little bit higher. You might, in fact, want a stop above the high of this bar, and maybe you're a person who always uses a money stop, a multiple of some minimum, like 10 ticks or 10 pips, in which case, 10 ticks or pips is not enough, because it's not above the top of the bar, but 20 ticks or pips is enough. The market has a number of good bear bars, good selling pressure, and is trying to reverse down. If the market gets above the high of this bar, what's more likely? A strong breakout in a new bull trend or a failed breakout in a reversal down? Probably a reversal down. They sold above the high of this bar, and it came back below the breakout point. They sold above the high of this bar, it came back below the breakout point. They sold at the high of this bar, probably is going to come back below the breakout point. If it gets above the high of this bar, what do you think is going to happen? Traders will sell it, and it will come back down far enough for the bearers to make a scalp. And therefore, if the market goes above this bar, chances are there are sellers above. If it goes far above, the bulls will probably win. You'll probably get a measured move up. Some traders know that it could easily go above the high of this bar, but still reverse down again, and those traders allow for that by using a wider stop, either a money stop or a stop based upon the price action, a price action stop. A lot of traders don't worry about picking the exact top. When you pick the exact top, you have to be totally prepared to sell at the exact instant. And some traders are slow to decide, or they tend to do other things while they're working. They're not watching at the instant the market reverses down. They also don't want to worry too much about the market maybe going another leg or two higher. They're just getting confident that the market will go down soon. They'll sell, and they don't want to worry that the market may go a little bit above the top of their sell signal bar. They're confident that the market's going down, and therefore they want to use a wide stop. If this is not the top, they believe the top will come soon. Unless the market goes far against them and hits a very wide stop, they're confident that the market will get a reversal soon, and they'll be able to make money. Whenever you are trying to get a higher probability of success, as I said, you pay for it with an increased risk. You have to use a wider stop. Also, you often will be willing to scale in higher, which additionally increases your risk. You need to keep the total risk on any trade to be no greater than on any other trade. And that means if you're using a wide stop, especially if you're willing to scale in, you have to reduce your position size so that if you get stopped out, you do not lose more than you do on any other trade. The market has been sideways for about 50 bars and now has an exceptional bear bar closing on its low, far below the low of the past 50 bars. And not only that, there is a follow-through bear bar. Probably, this will lead to a measured move down. At a minimum, a 60% probability you'll get a measured move down from the open of the first bar of the breakout to the close of the final bar of the breakout. Here, it's a two-bar breakout. 60% chance it'll fall for a measured move equal to that distance before it gets above the top of the bear breakout. Traders will sell that close of the follow-through bar. Some will sell as the bear bar is forming because it's clearly bearish and falling quickly. They'll put their stop above the top of the bear leg, which is also above the top of the sell climax bar. And in this particular case, let's say it's 50 ticks if you're trading the E-mini. If it's a Forex chart, let's say it's 50 pips. For some traders, when they see a bar that is so much bigger than all the prior bars, they don't want to risk all the way to its high. They know that if the market pulls back to around 50%, a lot of bears will sell a 50% pullback. And therefore, they'll put their stop maybe five ticks or five pips above the midpoint of the sell-off. They entered here. The top is up here. This is the midpoint. So maybe they'll put their stop five or 10 ticks above the midpoint. They might also want to use a money stop. For example, 20 ticks or pips above the entry price. These are all reasonable stops. I think the best stop is above the top of the bear leg. And obviously, a wider stop means greater risk. Greater risk means worse risk reward. And that always is accompanied with higher probability. In general, whenever you use a wider stop, you're increasing the probability of making money. I think of the three, this is the most logical stop. But some traders do not have an account size that would allow them to use that stop. And they therefore will have to use some other stop like just above the midpoint or maybe a fixed number of ticks or pips. 60% chance of a measure move down. 60% chance if you sell this close, it'll fall this distance before it goes that same distance up to the stop. You know where the entry price is, you know where the stop is, and therefore you can create a target equal to the distance to your stop. And there's a 60% chance that the market will get there whenever you see an exceptional breakout, good context, and a good follow through bar. Some traders will place limit orders to take profits at 1 times risk. Whenever you take a high probability trade, the trader's equation is positive when you take a reward equal to 1 times initial risk. In fact, it's positive if you take a reward equal to 1 times actual risk. If you sold here, your actual risk is probably just somewhere up in here, certainly no greater than above this bar. And theoretically, you could take a profit here. That would be the minimum acceptable. A 60% chance of reaching that target before losing that many ticks. However, in general, when I'm trading a big breakout with follow through like this, I'm basing my target on initial risk, not actual risk. The minimum is based upon actual risk. But when you get a breakout like this, 60% chance you're going to get a measured move based upon initial risk. So you have much more potential profit. Again, the higher the probability, the worse the risk reward. Whenever the probability is high, which means 60% or more as it is here, you can go for a smaller reward. For example, 1 times your initial risk. We have a reversal positive risk. Possible final flag. Trading range after a bull trend. We have a strong breakout and a strong reversal. We have a bear inside bar. Some traders will sell below the low of that bear bar, betting that the bull breakout will fail and that we'll get a swing down. That is a reasonable thing to do. Failed breakout above a tight trading range. And this tight trading range is probably the final bull flag in this bull trend. You can put your stop above the top of the sell signal bar. I would put it above the top of the bear trend because sometimes it will go a tick or two above the top of the sell signal bar, but not above the top of the bear trend. If you use the stock at the top of the bear trend and the two stops are close together, I think you get higher probability if you use the stop at the top of the bear trend. Which is always the case. Whenever you use a wider stop, you have a higher probability of making money. The market's in a bear trend, a bear breakout, good follow through bar. Probably some kind of a measured move down. Maybe based on the height of this double top. In any case, the bears have a double top bear flag here. Probably at least one more leg down, one pull back two or one pull back two. Traders are starting to look for some kind of a reversal up into possibly a trading range. Here we have two legs down, one pull back two. A failed break up below this low. The bulls made money buying at this low. This is probably the start of a trading range. Therefore, if you get a bear breakout and a reversal up, especially with a very good buy signal bar like this, traders will buy above the high of that bull bar. It's reasonable to put your stop just below the low of that bar. It's a very good looking bar. Two legs down, one pull back two. Possible final flag. The bear trend itself is not especially strong. We have a tail here, a reversal here, a reversal here. This looks like a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Now we're getting a fail break up below a low after the bulls made money buying at this low. And you have a very good looking bull bar for the signal bar. It's reasonable to put your stop just below the low. If you get stopped out and the market reverses up again, you can buy again. Minimum goal whenever you have a reasonable bottom is 10 bars, two legs, sideways, two up. We have consecutive sell climaxes, a little bit here, and then these bars, and then here, a little here, a little here, a little here. That increases the chances that at some point the market will have two legs and 10 bars sideways to up as a minimum. And you get reasonably good buying pressure. A tail here, bull bars, reversal, reversal, and now a very good looking buy signal bar. The channel is tight. The first reversal up probably minor, a bull leg in a trading range, but it could end up being major. In this particular case, the bulls got a swing up lasting 40 or more bars. You can call this a double bottom high or low major trend reversal. You have a bear trend, a bull breakout, a tight trading range, and this would be a major reversal. This is a minor reversal. This is a minor reversal. This is a minor reversal. This is a minor reversal. However, sometimes a minor reversal leads to an opposite trend, a swing trade, even though the odds are more likely that it's going to go sideways and enter a trading range. A lot of traders like to use a default size for a money stop. For example, a reasonable number of ticks or pips from the entry price, regardless of the price action. Again, a lot of traders don't worry about picking the exact top or the exact bottom, but they're pretty good at knowing that a bottom or top is going to come pretty soon. To make sure that they don't get stopped out on a minor new low here in a bear trend, they'll put a stop well below the signal bar. For example, some might use the size of an average trend bar for their stock. Other traders might use 10 to 20% of the average daily range, and they'll use a stop that far away from their entry price. It looks like we're entering a trading range. We have a bear trend, a lot of reversals, a lack of consecutive big bear trend bars. The trading range has replaced the bear trend. Traders are buying new lows. They bought below this low, below this low. In fact, they even bought below that low, and they'll certainly buy below this low. And now we're getting a reversal up. You can call it a spike in channel bear trend. Spike, pullback, second push, pullback, third push. I know it does not look like a channel, but it's basically a variation of a spike in channel trend. You could put your stop just below the low of this bear leg. Or if you prefer to use a fixed number of ticks or pips, you might put your stop 10 or 20 pips or 10 or 20 ticks below the low of the bar. Or about an average size of a bar. Or about 10% of an average daily range. This would all be around the same general area. Your purpose is you're allowing for one more leg down. Confident that when the market fell below here, they bought just a little bit below. When it fell below here, they bought just a little bit below. If it falls below here, they'll probably buy a little bit below. If it falls a lot below, then your premise is no longer valid. These traders will buy here, use the wider stop. Instead of getting stopped out here and then having to reenter on another reversal up, they would rather just buy what is reasonable, use a fairly wide stop, trusting that if it falls below this low, it will soon reverse up without hitting this stop. A lot of traders like to use a price action stop based upon a measured move. For example, we have a trading range. We have a double top, this high, that high. This is the neckline of this double top. And the bears are hoping that we'll fall for a measured move down if we break below the neckline of the double top. The bulls believe that it might fall to that measured move, but it probably will not fall much further. And therefore, if they buy here, they might put a stop just below this measured move target, betting that the bears who sold will take profits around the measured move target. And a trading range like this probably will not result in a strong bear trend. If the market does sell off, it probably will not fall much below this measured move target. And therefore, they'll put a stop just below that target, confident that if it falls down here, it will reverse up again. If they buy here, and if it does fall down here, maybe they can buy some more on a reversal up, confident that the breakout will fail, and it will get back to this entry price. And then if it does, you can get a break even at this entry price. And if you bought on a reversal up, you'd make a profit on your second entry. If instead it does this, then you simply hold on to your position and ride the swing up. We have a sell climax bar here. If you want to use a measured move target to create a stop, you could argue that it's a sell climax. Maybe the market will fall for a measured move based upon the height of that bear breakout, which would be here. And then you could put your stop just below that low. The reason why traders like to use a wide stop is it gives them time to allow their premise to work. Most of the time when you're using a wide stop, you're going to exit before your stop is hit. But the stop gives the market time to work in your favor. As long as you believe your premise is still good, you can rely on your stop, trusting that you're right and that the market will go your way. But it may go a little bit against you before it does go your way. If it hits that wide stop, you will conclude that your idea is no longer valid and therefore it's appropriate to get out of your trade. Take the loss. We have a bear trend. A head and shoulders bottom, left shoulder head and right shoulder. shoulder, this is a reasonable buy. Yet we're breaking below the right shoulder. Bulls exit there and you can see that's why we got this big bear bar. We have a good looking head and shoulders bottom, a wedge higher low, down up, down up, down up, a good looking buy signal bar. A lot of these bulls who buy here will put their stop just below this low and you can see this big bear trend bar is those bulls getting stopped out. When you get a bear breakout below a head and shoulders bottom, usually better than a 50-50 chance you're going to get trend resumption down. Maybe a measured move down, maybe based upon the height of this double top, this high, that high, neckline, measure move down. Maybe based upon this double top, this high, this high, neckline, measure move down. However, now we're getting a failed bear breakout. The bears have a breakout, but where is their follow-through bear bar? Instead of a bear bar, we got a bull inside bar. It looks like the bear breakout below the head and shoulders bottom right shoulder is failing and the bear breakout below the low is failing. And this instead of being a failed head and shoulders bottom might be a wedge bottom, three pushes down, one, two, three. You can see as soon as it fell below this low, traders bought. Sometimes you take the initial buy, you get stopped out, you get a second entry buy, higher probability, and it can go a long way. If you want, you can call this a nested wedge, three pushes down, one, two, three, and the third leg had three pushes down as well, one or one and then two and three. And you have a decent buy signal bar. Some of the traders who bought this higher low believe that if it fell below this low or this low, 50-50 chance it'll fall for a measured move. 50-50 chance the bear breakout will fail and reverse up. I think that's reasonable. Those traders will use a measured move for their protective stop. So if they buy above this bar, they don't want to exit at the low of this bar thinking that it's an attempt at a bottom. Maybe the market needs one more attempt at a bottom before you get a swing up. Traders with that mindset, and it's an okay thing to do, will use a wide stop allowing for the market to fall below this bar and even below this low, betting that if it does fall below, it'll still reverse up as it did here and here. We fell below this low, they bought below this low, they bought below this low, they bought below this low. They'll probably buy. So if you buy here, you can use a wider stop. Likewise, if you buy here, you could use a wider stop as well. Maybe we'll get a small second leg down after the spare breakout, but probably not much more down. If your premise of a reversal is valid, it should not fall too far down. And therefore, if you buy above here, maybe use a stop based upon a measured move down. We have the right shoulder and then the top, the neckline. Chances are the market will not fall here, or you can use a measured move based upon the height of the entire trading range. Double top, neckline, measured move down here. Trusting that we have a lot of trading range price action and any break below will reverse back up. So if you decided to use a measured move based upon the height of the right shoulder, that's the measured move and you put your stop just below. In this video, I talked about wide stops. A lot of traders use wide stops because they do not want to worry about picking an exact top or bottom. When they use a wide stop, they have to trade small. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of seven videos on protective stops. So for the short stories on the other side. I sit in mind. My Sally tells us that while the football team and you're getting our hopes and your shoulder are astringent. Then finish up this, we use the strength and work done a good start.