 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on actual risk. Sometimes the market will allow you to use a very tight stop and therefore your risk can be small. Sometimes even if your initial stop is big, your actual risk is small as well. When the risk is small, do not use the small risk to calculate a profit target because your profit target will be too small. However, if the risk is reasonable, then you can use it to find a profit target. Remember, the Trader's Equation has three variables, probability, risk, and reward. And a default for taking profits is two times your risk, assuming that your risk is at least as big as a scalp. The market had two very big bull trend bars and it pulled back. We have a small bull inside bar. It's a high one bull flag. It's reasonable to buy above the high of the bar. The market immediately went your way. It never fell below the low of the entry bar. So your actual risk was never any more than just below the low of that entry bar. A very small actual risk compared to the size of the bull breakout and to the size of the bull trend that followed. Two times actual risk is right here. Mathematically, it's always reasonable to take profits at two times actual risk. That results in a positive Trader's Equation. However, that is the absolute minimum to make the Trader's Equation positive. And that is not necessarily the best. Mathematics is the absolute minimum to make the Trader's Equation positive. When the actual risk is very small, but the probability of a big profit is very big, you should not use the actual risk to calculate where to take profits. Remember, that is the absolute minimum that makes mathematical sense. However, doing the minimum is not necessarily the best. For example, if your kid graduates from college with a D average, that might be the minimum that the school requires to get a diploma. But you would not be happy with that because he would have a hard time getting a job based upon that minimum. In general, when you have a very strong bull breakout like this, the market's probably going higher. Probably at a minimum based upon a measured move using the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar. 60% chance you'll go up for a measured move, which is far greater than two times your actual risk. As long as the market is strongly bullish, I think it's better to use other types of support and resistance to determine where to take profits, such as measured move targets, trend lines, and prior highs and lows. Two times actual risk is resistance, but you can see the market is ignoring it and the market went far above it. Again, using actual risk gives you a mathematical way to take profits, but it's a minimum and minimum is rarely ever the best choice. Strong bull breakout, 60% chance you'll get a measured move based upon the height of the breakout. Either the low to the high or the open of this bar to the close of that bar. 60% chance you're going up here. So it does not make sense to exit a two times actual risk. When I say 60% chance of going up here if you buy here, that's if you use a stop based upon the bottom of the most recent major low, which is here. If a trader buys above this bar and puts a stop below the bottom of the bull breakout, he has a 60% chance that the market will reach that target before it hits his stop below. That is his initial stop. Once the market started to go his way, he would then tighten the stop to the bottom of the most recent breakout here. You can see the pullback here, and that tells you that some traders are taking profits based upon the measured move up based upon the height of this bar. When the stop is far away, traders need to control their risk. And the easiest way to reduce the risk of having a stop that is far away is to reduce the position size. And when traders do that, you get a pause in the trend or a little pullback. Spike, tight channel, and every channel eventually evolves into a trading range. And that's what's taking place here. We're starting to get doji bars, pullback, more pullback, breakout, not very big, tail, not great follow through bear bars. It looks like we're starting to evolve into a trading range. And when that's the case, it's no longer in a strong bull trend. You have to trade it differently. And bulls are more willing to take profits, for example, below a bear reversal bar. Spike, pullback, second push, pullback, third push, a small spike in channel wedge. Since it's no longer a strong bull trend, traders will no longer trade it like a bull trend. They'll begin to trade it like a tight trading range, which means that they have to exit their longs or at least a good part of their longs. We have a pretty good bear breakout here. We had two legs up, one pullback, two, and a strong bear breakout. And now we entered a tight trading range, double top bear flag. Here's the first high, second high, and you have a bear bar closing in at slow. It's reasonable to sell below that, looking for at least a small second leg down and possibly a bear trend. If you did sell below the low of this bar, the market sold off without coming back. It never came back above the high of the entry bar. Therefore, your actual risk is no more than just above the high of that entry bar. It may have gone to the entry bar high after you entered. You don't know that, but you do know that it never went above the entry bar high. And if you had a stop above that entry bar high, as soon as you entered, if you put the stop at that line, you did not know it would be the entry bar high. But had you entered and put your stop there, you would not have been stopped out. In hindsight, that is the tightest stop that you could have used to avoid being stopped out. And this little green box is the height of the space between your entry and that stop. That is your actual risk. It's always mathematically acceptable to take your profits at two times actual risk. But when you look to the left at the size of the swings, exiting with that small a profit is probably not the best choice. It may be mathematically okay to do that, but there's probably going to be much more profit remaining in the trade. Strong enough breakout so that probably a 60% chance of the market falling for a measured move based upon the height of the breakout before it gets above the top of the breakout. So if a trader sold below this bear bar and put a stop up here, 60% chance it would get down here before it hit that stop. Therefore, this is a good, reasonable minimum goal. And you can see the tails and the sideways move down here. It tells you that there was some profit taking here. Traders in fact did take profits at a measured move down based upon the height of that bear breakout. Why would they do that? Well, their stop at this point is either at the top of this sell climax or the top of this bear leg. In either case, it's far away and they want to reduce their risk. The easiest way to reduce their risk is by reducing their position size and that profit taking results in a pause or a bear flag. A small double top bear flag, reasonable to take a short selling below the low of that sell signal bar. We have a new strong breakout. Traders who did sell there could lower their stock to just above the height of that bear breakout. Because it's a strong breakout, it probably will result in some kind of a measured move down. Some bears are selling closes. Others are selling below bear bars. Here, here, here. Every new breakout creates a new potential measured move down. I have the measured move based upon the top of the bear breakout to the bottom of the bear breakout. Some computers will base it upon the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar. These three bars. And that would be a tighter projection somewhere up in here. In any case, if you did sell here and you held short and you have a new breakout, you have a new profit target. If you used a projection based upon the height of this entire breakout, the market did not quite get there. But you're at the end of the session, it's reasonable to exit on a reversal up. We have a very strong rally and a deep pullback. A type of spike in channel bear trend. Strong bear breakout. So a spike, second push, third push. And the market's reversing up from the bottom of the channel and just above the bottom of the bull trend. Also, this tight trading range is a triangle. We have three reversals down. One, two, three. And you can call it a triangle if you want. But a tight trading range, late and a bear trend, usually becomes the final bear flag. The breakout usually does not go far and you get a reversal. It's reasonable to buy above the high of this bar. We have a final flag, a wedge bear channel, and a test of the bottom of the bull trend. If you bought above the high of this bar, you got filled here. The market went straight up. Your actual risk was no more than to just below the low of that bar. Very tiny actual risk compared to the size of the bars and the size of the swings. Big swing up, big swing down. Big swing down. Two times actual risk. It's okay to take profits there, but doing the minimum is rarely ever the best in life. And when you look at the size of the legs up and down and the size of the bars, this is probably way too small. You probably stand to make much more profit. Another approach would be to take profit at other types of resistance. For example, the top of the triangle, the top of the final bear flag. It's a reasonable place to take profits. And you can see there's a pause here, a little bit of profit taking. We're also testing the bottom of a trading range. We have a double bottom here and a breakout. These lows create a breakout point. You can see this bear bar in the tail here. And that indicates that there's some selling there. It's profit taking from these bulls. Some of it might be bear selling, but with a bull trend that is as strong as this, it's probably more profit taking from the bulls who bought anywhere in here than it is from bear selling. We have a gap between the low of this bar and the high of that bar. It might result in a measured move up. And some traders would take profits around that measured move target, which is also around the top of this bear leg. Anytime you get a pause at a logical profit taking area, it's a sign that many computers are taking profits there. If it's good for the institutions that programmed those computers, it's good for you as well. Far better than taking a minimal profit based upon a very small actual risk. Strong bull trend. It's a high two pullback, a high one, and then a high two. A reasonable buy. Dojis, three dojis, so possible tight trading range soon. This is probably too tight of a stop. You're in a tight trading range and the market may come down more before it goes up. A better stop is below the bottom of this bull breakout, possibly even below the bottom of the entire rally. However, if you're taking this buy, using a stop right below your signal bar is probably too tight. This is a more appropriate stop. You can use your actual risk to determine a profit target. If ever you take a trade and you're not sure where the profit target should be, it's always reasonable to take profits at two times your actual risk, or to swing trade and see how far it goes. Simply rely on a logical stop. And even if you buy this thinking you're going to scalp, I think you need a swing stop and you should trade small enough so that you can scale in more on a pullback if you get a pullback. High probability that we're going at least a little bit higher. Actual risk, you buy above the high of this bar, you filled right here. The market went straight up. Your actual risk was there. And this is one times actual risk. And you can see there's a pullback there. Because the trend is strong, it's a high probability that you'll make a reward at least equal to your risk. And therefore, when you're buying in a strong breakout like this, you have a high probability trade. It's reasonable to go for one times actual risk for your profit target. As long as it's at least as big as a minimum scalp. I want to talk more about using risk to determine profit targets. We have a bull trend. And if you want, you can call it a high one bull flag. You can call it a high two with this. You can call it a double bottom bull flag. Doesn't matter. It's a pullback and a bull trend. It's reasonable to buy above the high of this bar. Remember, if you take profits based upon actual risk, it gives you the minimum profit target that you need to have a profitable strategy. A positive traders equation. Never lose sight of that goal. You always need a reward equal to at least two times actual risk. And a strong trend, you can go for one times actual risk. Now, if you're scalping, can you take profits based upon the initial risk instead of the actual risk? It really doesn't matter whether you take the profits based upon initial or actual risk or any other support or resistance. Your goal is to have a positive traders equation. Anytime you structure any trade, you have to make sure that it makes sense that you have a positive traders equation. The minimum profit is always two times actual risk, but sometimes that target is too small and you have a very high probability of making a bigger profit. Another choice is to use initial risk, which is almost always bigger than actual risk. Risk provides you with targets that provide the minimum needed for a positive traders equation. But other targets are often better. And if the context is good and the target based upon actual risk looks too small, don't exit at two times actual risk. Hold for a bigger profit. Use other support or resistance for your profit target. Let's say you buy above the high of this bar. And let's say your stop is below the low of the bar. And that therefore is your initial risk. From just above the high of this bar, you get filled right here down to just below the low of that bar. That's how much you're willing to risk initially. We got a little pullback after you entered and then the trend resumed. So your actual risk is from your entry price here to just below the low of this bar right there. Bull trend, high probability trade. This is one times actual risk. And that's a reasonable target for scalpers as long as it's at least as big as a minimum scalp. One times initial risk is a little bit higher. Initial risk is greater than the actual risk. And the market went a little bit above that projection. Although it's hard to see on this screen. It went a little bit above. So the traders who tried to exit at one times actual risk made their target. Their profit taking in part resulted in this pullback. Remember what you're trying to accomplish here. You're trying to make money. And to make money, you need to be trading in a way that results in a positive traders equation. If you take a hundred trades, you want to make sure that the trades you take result in a profit at the end of those hundred trades. You lose some, you win some, but you want a profit. There are only two things that you can control. Risk, which is where your stop is. And reward, which is where your profit taking limit order is. And you have to be able to take profits that make sense mathematically. It's always mathematically acceptable to take profits at two times actual risk. When it's small, you can go for a bigger target. For example, two times initial risk. If you're buying in a trend, taking profits at one times actual risk or one times initial risk makes sense because the probability of making money is higher. If you go for a tighter target, a smaller target like one times actual risk, you have a higher probability of success, which makes sense because your reward is smaller. If you go for a bigger target like one based upon initial risk, the target's further away, the reward is greater. The probability is slightly less that you will achieve that goal. But the math is still valid. We have a bull trend. Let's say you bought the follow through bar, the close of this bar after this breakout above that high. Mathematically, that is an okay thing to do. And let's say you put your stop just below the low of this bar and you would have been stopped out here. This low fell below the low of that bar. That would have been your initial risk. You buy here, you put your stop just below this bar, and the market fell just below the low. You would have been stopped out. Let's say instead of the bulls getting stopped out, the market went up 5 ticks or 11 pips without pulling back. That trader then could have scalped, theoretically at least, with a 4 tick profit or if it was a forex market, a 10 pip profit. That would be greater than the 2 tick or 5 pip actual risk and equal to the 4 tick, 10 pip minimum scalp size, resulting in a positive traders equation. But instead of reaching that minimum scalp, 4 ticks above the entry price or forex market, 10 pips above the entry price, the market fell maybe 20 ticks or 50 pips to below the stop. And the trader ended up losing 20 ticks, for example, if it's an e-mini or a stock or 50 pips, let's say, if it's a forex market. Can a trader keep going for a 4 tick scalp or a 10 pip scalp and sometimes lose 20 ticks, sometimes lose 50 pips and still make a profit? Here we have a bull breakout and we have bull bars with bad follow through. Bull bar, doji bar. Bull bar, tail, doji bar. Bull bar, bar with a tail, doji bar. Traders would conclude that the market's probably evolving into a trading range with these two dojis, spike, pullback, channel and the start of a trading range. Therefore, the premise has changed. If you're buying up here on the premise that it's a bull trend and you see all of this trading range price action, you probably have to conclude that it's in a trading range. It's still in the bull trend, but a trading range within the bull trend. You can also argue expanding triangle, a little reversal down, reversal down, reversal down. If you took that buy, should you wait for your stop to be hit below the low of this bar? A lot of traders would just say, okay, it's really not a strong bull trend at this point. It might be a trading range. I could get a very deep pullback. Maybe I should just exit below a bear bar and get out here instead of waiting for my stop to get hit down here. And if you did exit there, we have a strong bear bar, probably at least a small second leg sideways to down. And this could be the second leg down. We have a bull bar closing on its high, another bull bar closing on its high here. This is a second reversal up from around this low, the bottom of the developing range. It's a reasonable buy. Now let's go back to the trader who bought this close, hoping that the market would continue higher. And let's say he put a stop below the low of this bull leg. This is really not a particularly major higher low. We got a new high, but the breakout is not all that strong. It's probably better to think this might be a trading range and use a wider stop, maybe below here. But let's say he did put a stop below that bar. He lost a lot of points. So he was trying to make one point and he lost several points or trying to make 10 pips. He lost whatever 50 pips. This is not representative of all of his losing trades. It's an outlier. It's unusual that he'll be losing that much when trying to make a scalp. Also, it's not great trade selection. Not many bulls would take the third push up after a breakout. Breakout, second push, third push. Especially when the rally looks weak and there's a potential for an expanding triangle top. Therefore, this is not a typical average buy. And this is not a typical average risk that you would be taking. And therefore, it doesn't represent accurately what an average trade looks like. If you're scalping, therefore, you should not look at this and say, well, how can I possibly make money if I'm risking several points to make one point or 50 pips to make 10 pips? It's because this is not what the average losing trade looks like. And this is not what the average entry looks like. So it's not representative of an average collection of trades that you would take. For every one of those 20 tick or 50 pip losses, there is an equal number of double bottoms and 20 tick or 50 pip gains. Here we have an example of a bull breakout and good follow through. Traders can buy that close. And probably better to put the stop below the bottom of the bull trend, not just below the bull breakout. And the market came exactly down to the bottom of that bull trend. And twice it got there, micro double bottom, and did not hit the stop. And now your actual risk is just below this low. You bought here. The market went against you to just below that low. It's reasonable to go for a profit at least one times actual risk, which is up here. This is an extreme example the other way. There was an extreme drawdown. The stop did not get hit. And the trader was able to hold for a reward bigger than four ticks or 10 pips. It also is an outlier. It's something unusual, not representative of a collection of trades that you would take. But these trades do happen. Just like you get occasional big losers, you get occasional big winners. Again, not a strong buy setup. Most of the setups have higher probability and smaller risk. But if you take this trade, your stop is below the bottom of the major higher low, below this low. And if you get a deep pullback, then your actual risk is big. And it's probably worth trying to make a profit that is equal to your actual risk. A lot of traders would simply get out break even at their original entry price. And this will cause this pullback. Some traders would buy here, keep the stop here, and then when they get a bull bar, they'll buy more here. And either get out everything here or part out here, and then the rest here. Whenever you're looking at a strategy and trying to determine if it makes sense mathematically, you have to be careful about sampling error. You can't just sample one setup and assume it represents all the other setups. Because a lot of times you'll be picking one that's fairly extreme and not representative of all the other trades that you take. If you take 100 trades and go for 1x risk when the trades are high probability, and 2x risk when the trades are low probability, the odds of making a profit are very high. If instead you only want to look at a few of your 100 trades and try to determine whether or not your strategy is good, make sure that the sample that you're looking at represents an average typical trade and not an extreme winner or an extreme loser. If a billion people each took 100 trades and managed them well, the group has a very, very high probability of making a profit. However, there'll be one person in that group of a billion who loses 20 ticks or 50 pips on all 100 trades. That's sampling error. There'll also be one lucky trader who makes 20 ticks and 50 pips on all 100 trades. Again, those are the outliers. But the entire group would make money, which means the average person who used that strategy would make money. I made the point that if you base your profit on the size of actual risk, you have a reasonable approach to trading. Your minimum goal is going to be at least 2x actual risk for most trades. If you're buying a high probability trade or selling a high probability trade, for example, during a strong breakout, you can exit with 1x actual risk. But that is the minimum, and the minimum is rarely the best. And I talked about other ways to use risk to find your profit targets. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on actual risk. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on actual risk. ... How much you're wasting? You spend finances by putting your help out.