 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on reversals. I think it's important to understand that beginners particularly love reversals, and that is because beginners only think about risk. Their accounts are small, and they're terribly afraid of losing money. If they lose their account, they may lose their dream of being a professional trader. And because of that, they're always looking for trades that have the smallest risk, and that usually means that they're looking for reversals. However, they totally ignore the other two variables, probability and reward. And usually a trade that has low risk has low probability. In other words, you lose most of the time. I want to talk a little bit about buying and selling pressure. the earliest signs that one side might win. And finally, I want to talk about a nested pattern that is a pattern within a larger pattern of the same type. For example, you might have a small wedge forming the third leg of an even larger wedge. A beginner has a small account, and he worked really hard to save money to create that account, and he's very afraid of losing that money. Therefore, when he's trading, he usually always focuses on risk. And the result is he's often seeing reversals instead of strong trends. Here we have a very strong bull breakout, and the beginner thinks, OK, second entry short. Here's the first entry. Here's the second entry. Maybe this is really part of a trading range. If I sell below this bar, my stop is right here. I'm not risking much, and I might make a reward all the way down to here, far greater than the risk. He's ignoring probability. After a strong reversal up, and then a strong breakout like this, the odds of this being a profitable short are small. Probably the reversal will fail and create a bull flag, and then be followed by another leg up. The sell signal bar, it's not very big. So if a trader sells below its low, he gets filled right here, and his stop is right there. So the risk is small. However, whenever your risk is small, the probability of making money is usually small, which means the probability of losing money is high. The beginners, they see reversals everywhere. They're constantly seeing wedge tops and strong bull trends, ignoring the strength of the trend and the low probability of the reversal. The beginner is so eager to sell that he does not wait for a trend line break. For example, here's a bull trend and a trend line break. And he sees reversals everywhere. He's constantly trying to sell in strong bull trends, and he's constantly trying to buy in strong bear trends. He's selling before there's any significant selling pressure. Three bear bars, but small, prominent tails below. And the size of the bear bodies is small compared to the size of the bull bodies here and here. Very little selling pressure, so very little chance that the bears will win, even though you might say this is a wedge. One, two, and three. Low probability bet. And that is usually what you get when you take a trade that has very little risk. When a breakout is strong like this, three consecutive bull bars closing at or near their highs, the odds are high that you're going to get at least a second leg up. This could be the second leg up, but probably we're going higher. If these bear bars closed on their lows, then maybe this would be the end of the move. But with the big tails below the bars and the bear body being small here, the odds are any reversal attempt will result in a bull flag and lead to at least one more leg up. It's too early to sell. A beginner is always wondering how he can possibly be losing money when he's working so hard to reduce risk. It's because he's fighting a trend and structuring trades that have bad meth, you're going to lose money. The beginner pretends that probability does not exist. He's going to take the trade because the risk is small and the reward is big. Great risk reward. If he watches a financial show on television, all he hears them talk about is risk reward. And he looks at this and says, well, my risk is small. My reward is huge. That's fantastic risk reward and therefore a good trade. What he does not realize is on television, they always talk about risk reward. They rarely ever talk about probability. And that is as important as risk and reward when it comes to the trader's equation. He also thinks that if taking one trade is good, taking 10 trades is better. So he's constantly looking to take a lot of trades. He's constantly selling anything that looks like a reversal in a bull trend. And he's constantly buying anything that looks like a reversal up in a bear trend. A reversal, a failed breakout, a lower high. It's a sell. He sells. And then he gets stopped out. A second entry reversal wedge, one, two, three. Failed breakout of a trading range. It's a sell. And he gets stopped out. Here we have a double bottom, slightly lower low, double bottom. A breakout test, a test of the breakout above the trading range. It's a buy. Ignoring how tight the channel is. And he gets stopped out. He buys again. A wedge bull flag, one, two, three. And he gets stopped out again. Ignoring that, this reversal is occurring in a fairly tight bear channel here. And within a larger bear channel here, that is also fairly tight. It's a low probability buy. A minor reversal. The best the bulls probably get is a trading range. Again, another reversal. This time another wedge. One, two, three. The last wedge was one, two, three. And now he sees a new wedge. One, two, three. He ignores a bad looking buy signal bar. He ignores these two big bear bars. With that other big bear bar, all he sees is a wedge and a higher low. Must be a wedge bull flag. He gets stopped out again. And all of these losses are relatively small. However, if you get a lot of them, they add up to a very big loss. It's like bleeding to death from a thousand paper cuts. He's trying to avoid risk. He's trying to take low risk trades. And he is. However, the probability is also low. And if you lose frequently with low risk trades, that low risk adds up to a lot of risk by the end of the day. And the beginner loses a lot of money taking low risk trades. The beginner knows this is a bad short. He knows this is a bad buy. He doesn't care. He knows the context is bad, but he's just focusing on one thing risk. He does not want to risk very much on every trade. At some point, he loses so often that he expects to lose on every trade. Yet, he feels like he has to trade because that's what traders do. They keep trading. However, if traders keep trading using a certain style of trading and they lose repeatedly, they stop. But beginners don't stop. They know that all they have to do is just get a little bit better and they'll make money. But that's not true. Selling in a strong bull trend or buying in a fairly strong bear trend, you're going to lose. Even if you lose very little, you're going to lose often. And ultimately, you'll lose everything in your account. Whenever you take a trade and you feel hopeful, I hope, boy, I hope this one works. I really need this one to work. I've been losing all day. I really hope this works. That immediately tells you that the probability is low. Whenever you need hope, you're taking a trade that is probably going to lose money. Another problem that beginners face is they lose so often, they're taking low probability trades. That means they're probably going to lose and that means they lose often. When they finally get a profit, they take it immediately. They scalp, forgetting that they need a big profit to offset all of their losses. So not only are they taking low probability trades, losing often, when they finally get a profitable trade, they scalp. Whenever you take a low probability trade, you need a very big reward to offset your low probability. That means you need a swing trade. However, the beginner is so desperate for a win that he takes a quick profit and scalps. And that's a losing strategy. If you have a low probability trade, a low risk trade, low probability trade, you need occasional very big wins to offset all of those losses. And beginners just can't do it. They're so happy to finally not have a losing trade that they take a quick profit. And that is a losing strategy. You cannot have small profits if you're taking low probability trades. The beginner who is selling, selling and losing, and now sells and has a winner. He's really excited. He's selling a wedge top and he finally has a winner. But he saw the last two times he had winners and they quickly turned into losers. He sold here. He had a winner. It quickly turned into a loser. The beginner takes his profit right here. He scalps out. He's so afraid to lose. Low probability plus low reward is a losing strategy. It's a negative trader's equation. If you're going to take that trade, you have to be swing trading. You need an occasional big win to offset the frequent small losses. So to get a positive traders equation when you're taking a low probability trade, you need a big reward. You have to be swing trading. You need to be swing trading. You need to be swing trading. You need to be swing trading. You need to be swing trading. You need to be swing trading. Well, here's another example. We have a bull trend. Lots of wedges. One, two, three. You can keep drawing wedges all day long. One, two, three. Maybe one or one, two, three. Failed breakout above a high. The second entry short. Maybe a wedge. One, two, three. Second entry short here. Yet, they're all losers. However, the beginner says, well, the risk is not big. If I sell here, my stop is here. I don't lose much. If I sell here, my stop is here. Don't lose much. Sell here. Don't lose much. But if you keep losing all day long, those small losses add up. Low probability trades. That means you're going to lose most of the time. Even if you lose a little, lots of little losses adds up to a big loss. You keep getting stopped out all day long. And your low risk strategy results in a very big loss at the end of the day. And like I said, when you finally do win, you will not make enough to offset all of your losers because you'll probably scalp. And if you're taking a low probability trade, you need big reward. A low probability trade goes hand in hand with a swing trade. If you're looking for scalps, you have to take high probability trades. Shorting in a tight bull channel is not a high probability bet. Skilled traders see these same reversals. But they're not shorting. They're waiting for them to fail and become bull flags. They're buying the reversal up. They see the reversal down. They expect rather than a reversal and a bear trend, it'll fail and become a bull flag. Reversal, they'll buy. Reversal, they'll buy. And they'll put a stop down here. Reversal down. They'll buy the reversal back up. Reversal down. They'll buy the reversal up. And they'll put a stop down here. High probability. The risk is bigger. If they're buying up here, their stop is here. But the probability is very high. And they have a much better chance of making money. Taking a trade that has bigger risk because it has much higher probability. I want to talk a little bit about buying and selling pressure. The earliest signs of whether the bulls or bears will win and create a breakout. If you're looking for a major reversal, that means you're looking for a big move. Two legs, maybe 20 bars. That usually does not come from a small pattern. For a trend reversal, you need buying pressure. If you have a bear trend, you need buying pressure. And you can get that from two very big bull bars like this, closing on their high. But you can also get it from 10 smaller bars. This is enough buying pressure. You have a bull bar, big bull bar closing on its high. You have an even bigger bull bar closing near its high. This is enough buying pressure so that traders will look to buy a reversal up from the next sell-off. A possible higher low major trend reversal. This initially is probably a minor reversal. The low is only one bar low. However, if you get enough buying pressure in that minor reversal here, and this is probably a minor reversal as well, it can lead to a major reversal on the next big move down. Minor reversal probably going to lead to a trading range. However, it creates enough buying pressure, strong breakout above the bear channel, and an even stronger breakout. The next reversal down might fail and lead to a major trend reversal. A double bottom, high or low major trend reversal. And it led to a swing up. Here we have a pair of bull bars, another bull bar, two to four small bull bars. Here we have three bars up. It's just not enough buying pressure to reverse a bear trend. Any reversal up is probably minor. The bulls need more big bull bars before they can get a major reversal. A reversal into an opposite trend instead of a minor reversal into a bear flag or a trading range. Remember the market cycle. A bear trend usually transitions into a trading range before you can get a bull trend. While in the trading range, the bulls can create enough buying pressure so that eventually there will be a successful major trend reversal and a bull trend. So that eventually there will be enough buying pressure so that there will be a major reversal and a bull trend. Bear trend evolved into a trading range. Maybe a double bottom, slightly higher low, major trend reversal. The bulls are beginning to get big bull bars closing on their highs. That is buying pressure. And it increases the chances that the bulls eventually will be able to get a bull trend. Higher low, major trend reversal. Bulls can buy with a stop above the high of that bull bar. And then a protective stop below here. Again, if a reversal lacks pressure, the reversal is probably minor. Three bear bars, four bear bars. Is that enough for a major reversal? Probably not. The best the bears probably get is a trading range. More likely they get a bull flag and the bull trend will resume. Is this a high or high major trend reversal? This is probably not enough selling pressure. The bull trend probably will have to transition into a trading range. And during the trading range, the bears can accumulate a lot of bear bars. After that, they have a chance at a major trend reversal. Not enough selling pressure. Sideways more likely than down. Minor reversal probably into either a bull flag or a trading range. We have a bull trend. We have a minor reversal here. Another one here. And this one is probably minor as well. I would not call it a significant wedge top because the legs down are small. Probably going to result in two sideways legs instead of a big bear trend. One sign of selling pressure is a significant break below the bull trend line, which we have here. It came from a series of small bars, but it came from a lot of bars. And it broke far below the bull trend line by going mostly sideways. But that's all the traders need. At this point, you look back and say, well, not much selling pressure, not much selling pressure, but it tends to accumulate. And now we have a break far below the bull trend line. After the bull trend resumes up, traders look for a failure in the neighborhood of the old high and then a major trend reversal. For a bull to bear reversal, usually you need some selling pressure first. And it usually comes during the formation of a trading range. So bull trend and then trading range. It began here. And then after there's a trading range, the bears can accumulate enough selling pressure to take control and form a bear trend. Bull trend weakened. Still a bull trend, still a bull trend. The trading range probably began with this pullback. The market transitions from bull trend into trading range and then into bear trend. And the trading range often begins before the final high of the bull trend. This final part is a bull leg and what will become a trading range. The bears begin to accumulate selling pressure. And at some point they're strong enough to take control of the market. For example, here we have a lower high major trend reversal, a wedge lower high, three pushes up one and then a bear bar and then two and bear bar and then three. Wedge lower high major trend reversal, 40% chance of a swing down. Reasonable trade reward much bigger than risk, 40% probability. That's what the probability usually is for any major reversal. But the reward is at least twice the risk and therefore the trader's equation is positive. I want to finish by talking about nested patterns, a pattern that is within a larger pattern of the same type. The nested pattern usually is in the final leg of the bigger pattern. Sometimes it can be bigger. Sometimes it can occupy two thirds of the bigger pattern. Three pushes up from a low, one, two, three. So this is a wedge rally. And it's within a larger wedge. Three bigger pushes up, one, pull back two, pull back three. With the third subdivided into a wedge as well, one, two, three. So we have a smaller wedge within a larger wedge. And therefore this is a nested wedge pattern. It has a higher probability of a reversal. If you were to look at a smaller timeframe chart, this would in fact be a big pattern. For example, if this is a 60 minute chart and then you flip to a five minute chart, this would be a pretty big pattern. Four hours down, four hours, three or four hours down. So the smaller pattern is always a bigger pattern on a smaller timeframe chart. Two or more different timeframes trying to do the same thing. Higher probability of a profitable trade. Look at this. Three pushes down. Bear bar, bull bar, bear bar, then tail for the second push down. And then we have a third push down here. We have a wedge bottom. Very small, minor on this timeframe. If this is a daily chart, this could be a five or a six day wedge bottom on a five minute chart. Slightly bigger pattern. This small wedge, one, two, three, is within a larger wedge. One, two, three. And here's a larger wedge. One, pull back, two, pull back, three. Within a larger wedge. One, two, three. Within a larger wedge. One, two, three. So we have several layers of nesting within a large wedge bottom. And then we have a good buy signal bar here. A higher probability that you'll get at least a couple legs sideways to up. When you have many ways to draw the same pattern, then the market's trying to reverse at the same price on many different timeframes. Most computers will see at least one version of the wedge. And that means most computers will be looking for a wedge reversal. And if all of the computers are looking to buy, there's a higher probability that the reversal will come. The probability is especially good when there's a strong buy signal bar. And when it's the same buy signal bar for every way you can draw the wedge bottom. The market's in a trading range. Most reversals result in legs within the trading range. The end result is a big trading range. Not an opposite trend. Higher low major trend reversal. But a lot of trading range price action here and all the way down here. Big bear bars, bad follow through. Tail, bad follow through. The rally up, big tail on top, bear bars. This looks like trading range price action. Even though this is a major trend reversal, it's probably going to result mostly in a big trading range. Higher or low major trend reversal. Bull trend. But bad follow through, bad follow through, bad follow through, bad follow through. This is probably going to be a bull leg in what will become a trading range. And therefore traders will look to sell a pattern near the high. And we have a wedge top. However, there are two ways to draw the wedge top. One, two, three. And one, two, three. So it's a nested pattern. First push, second push, and third push subdivides into a smaller pattern. Also, a measured move projection. We have a break above a trading range. Traders are looking for a measured move up. And they expect profit taking and resistance. Also, we're testing a prior high. So some profit taking there as well. Bears will look to short. Bear bar closing on its low. Bulls will take profits. Aggressive bears will sell. Whenever you have a major trend reversal. Here we have a bear trend. Bull breakout. High or low. Major trend reversal. 40% of the time, you'll get a swing trade like this. And most of the time, the swing trade results in a big trading range. It evolves into a trading range. Only 20% of the time, you get a big, big trend out of a major trend reversal. You can get the end of the bear trend. 40% of the time, you'll get a swing up. 20% of the time, the swing will become a big, bold trend. But 40% of the time, you get a swing up. And then the evolution into a big trading range. A trend. Here's a bear trend. It usually is followed by a trading range. It was followed by a trading range here. And ultimately, even a very big trading range here. Usually, a bear trend is not followed by a bull trend. A bull trend is not followed by a bear trend. At best, you usually get a swing. 20, 30, 40 bars in the opposite direction. A bear trend or swing with bad follow-through. Looks like a bear leg in a trading range. Again, a bear trend or a swing. We're staying above the lows over here. Staying below the highs over here. That means this bear trend is simply a leg within a big trading range. A bull trend. Not consecutive big bull bars closing on their highs. We had a couple here, but bad follow-through. And then bad follow-through here. A bull leg in what became a big trading range. Not a bull trend. I began by talking about how beginners love reversals because all they see is risk. And they ignore the fact that when they're in a bull trend, they're not going to be a bull trend. I begin by talking about how beginners love reversals because all they see is risk. And they ignore the fact that whenever you take a trade that has very little risk, it usually has very little probability of success. And that means you lose most of the time. And it's usually a bad strategy. I then talked about buying and selling pressure. If you're going to get a trend reversal, let's say you have a bull trend and you're looking for a bear trend, it usually will not become a bear trend until there is some accumulation of selling pressure. Likewise, if you have a bear trend and you're looking for a reversal up, you usually need some buying pressure before the reversal takes place. And that buying and selling pressure usually comes during a trading range. Usually the trend has to transition into a trading range before it becomes an opposite trend. I finally talked about nested patterns, where you have a pattern within a larger similar pattern. When you find a nested pattern, you have a higher probability of success. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on reversals. Pic Durst weeb prophet. It will not take down a vicocolite tool...