 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on swing trading. In this video, I'm going to give some more examples of swing trading for day trades. Here we have a gap down and a rally that has pullbacks every few bars and a lack of consecutive big bull trend bars. Bull bar here, doji. We have a couple of bull bars here, but not all that big. We have a gap down and now we have a reversal up and outside bar and traded below the low of the prior bar and then above the high of the prior bar and it closed above the high of the prior bar. And now we have consecutive bull bars. The market's always in long at this point. Higher prices are likely to be a little bit lower. A lot of traders will buy the close of that bar, put a stop below its low and hold on as long as it remains always in long. No reason to get out at any point up to here. It's still always in long. At this point we've had four bars without a pullback and we've had six bars without a bare body. These four bars without a pullback make this a trend from the open bull trend, even though it began on the second bar. bar. However, doji, doji, doji, doji, and doji here. Of those first six bars, five are dojis. That is not a strong trend. And after this good looking bull bar, we have bad follow through. Good bull bars, but look at the follow through after every good bull bar. Not good. The gaps close. We have a gap. This closed that high and it closed. We gapped here. This closed that high and it closed. And the same here. Closed above this high, but the gap closed. The bulls see this as a spike pullback channel. Three or four pushes up. One, two, three, four. It's a weak rally, but still always in long. The bulls see this as a spike. Look at this. If you're a bear and you look at this and see five bars up, four are dojis, you might think probably bull leg in a trading range. And therefore you sell at the high of the prior bar and you sell more higher looking for a scalp. If the market falls back below your original entry price, you can get a break even on your first sell and with a profit on your second sell. The limit order bears are making money. They sell here with a limit order at that high. They sell more higher and it comes down to their original entry price. The limit order bears are making money. Typically, if it's a strong gold trend, it's very difficult to make money selling above prior highs and scaling in higher. Limit order bears selling at this high can scalp out. Limit order bears selling at that high can scalp out. They sell here, sell more higher, comes back to their first price. They can get a break even on their first and with a scalp profit on their second. Limit order bears selling at this high can We have a bull trend, but we're also in a gap down and a sloped down moving average. You can argue that this entire rally is a bear flag, a bull channel after a gap down. So it could be a gap spike and then pull back and then trend resumption down. Now we have gap bars, gaps between the low of the bar and the moving average. And therefore, we might test back down to any of these higher lows. Five dojis in the first six bars, bad follow through after every bull bar. Limit order bears making money during a rally. Those are all signs of trading range price action. And they increase the chances that there will be a lot of trading range price action today. So, if you have a bull leg in a trading range, you can see that there will be a bull and bear legs. Therefore, traders will look at this rally and conclude it's probably a bull leg in what will become a trading range. And if it's a trading range, the bulls will look to take profits earlier than they might otherwise. If you have a bull leg in a trading range, a trading range requires bull and bear legs. Chances are there will soon be a bear leg in a trading range. Typically, a trading range has legs that last about two hours, maybe three hours. So, 20 or 30 bars. And this has gone on for more than 20 bars at this point. And this is what followed. We have a bear bar and a follow through bear bar. This is a sign that the final bulls gave up. If they did not exit below this bear bar or below this bear bar, this is telling us that they exited on that bear bar or this bear bar. This is probably the start of a bear swing in a trading range day. The bulls have bought this close. I think they have to get up below the low of this bear bar or the low of this bear bar. This is good enough so that the market would probably get at least a small second leg up. But this little rally above the high of this bar might be the end of that second leg up. And now we have a micro double top and we have a weak rally with three or four pushes up. One, two, three, four. It's probably a bull leg in a trading range. And after three or four legs up, we'll probably soon get a bear leg in the trading range. And therefore the swing bulls have bought here, original stop here, will get out either below here or below here. For the bulls, can they argue that this is a higher low major trend reversal? We have a bear trend and a bull breakout of the bear trend. And now we have a higher low. But it's a higher low coming in an endless pullback, a tight bear channel with a lot of dojis, not much buying pressure. Yes, it's a higher low major trend reversal above this bar, above that bar, above this bar, above this micro double bottom. But when the channel is tight like that, it's a low probability buy. More likely the best the bulls get is a minor reversal in a trading range or a bear flag. You can argue wedge one, two, three, or one, two, three, four. And we have a bear sell signal bar. Bulls will take profits there and bears will sell there. Or because they think the bull rally will result in a trading range, they might wait for a second entry sell and sell below this bar. Some sold there and some sold below this bar, second entry short. Higher probability to sell after you see a bear breakout bar and a bear follow-through bar, which is often small. You could sell here, you could sell below this bear bar here. Those are not high probability sells. Once you have a decent sized bear bar and a follow-through bar and the context is good for a swing down, it's higher probability to sell here, even though you stop is further away. And the bears who sell here are looking for a swing down. They're selling fairly low, below the high. So their risk is relatively big. They sell, let's say, that close and stop above this bear bar or above the high of the day. And they just hold through all of these reversals up because none of them was enough to make the market always end long. Some bears will sell the close of the bear breakout. Most bears like to sell the close of the follow-through bar or even sell above a bar, betting that the first reversal up will fail. The bears taking the sell are selling for a swing. The probability is not high enough for a scalp. Selling here, stop up here. You have to risk too much to take this for a scalp. It's a reasonable swing trade. We're breaking below the bull channel. The bull channel was probably a bull leg in a trading range. We have a wedge, three or four pushes up. We're probably going to get at least a couple legs down. One pull back two. We might trend down for three or four hours. Some bears, instead of selling that close, will sell above the high of this bar or above the high of any of these bars, betting that they are bad buy signals and that the market went always in short on the close of this bar. And all of these reversal attempts probably will result in a lower high and then lower prices. Some bears will also sell the close of a bull bar, thinking that the bulls need at least a couple consecutive good bull bars to convert the market to always in long. And therefore, they'll sell the close of one, especially near the moving average, betting that the bulls will not get two. They sell that close, again, stop above here, and they just hold on until either the market clearly becomes always in long, or until the end of the session. The bears who did not sell here could sell below this bear bar. It's a failed bull reversal and a lower high. The bulls were hoping for a higher low major trend reversal. The gap down is a bear trend, and this is a bull breakout, and they're hoping this is a higher low. They can buy there, but they'll probably give up below that bear bar or second or third failure and reversal down. And these two consecutive bear bars make it likely that we're going lower. Maybe a measured move down from this high to that low. For the bulls, this bear breakout is forming a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down, one, two, and three. You can call it a double bottom over here, this low, that low. They can buy for a swing up, and the bears can be holding short. They sell here, stop above here. Some bears will exit here. We have a failed breakout below this low, a possible training range, and a reversal up. It's reasonable to exit here. We have a micro double bottom. You expect a second leg down after this, so one, pull back two. We try to reverse up. We're trying to reverse up a second time. It is reasonable to get out of shorts, either above this bull bar or above this bull bar, which would be about break even there. Bears could also continue to hold short and rely on a stop above the most recent major lower high, which is here. Bulls, they could buy this, hoping for a swing up. But when a channel is this tight, I like to wait for a strong reversal up and then buy, and this is just not strong enough. The bears who do exit here will look to sell again below a bear bar. We're still always in short. That means traders still believe it's more likely that we're going to go down than it is that we'll reverse. The bulls have not yet done enough to take control. We're still forming lower highs. And therefore, if the bears do get out, they have to sell again below a bear bar, like below this bar, get short here, below that bar, get short here. After a breakout like this and a lower high, a lot of traders will put their stop here instead of up here. Again, if a swing bear sold here and they exited on the second or third reversal up, one, two, three, they have to be prepared to sell again below a bear bar, unless the market becomes always in long. This is not enough yet to make it always in long. It's a weak bear channel. We keep getting reversals, and traders buying at the low and adding on lower are able to make money. This is probably a bear leg in what will become a trading range. But if the bears did get out here, they'll sell again on a reversal down. We have a bull bar, a bear bar, a pair of bull bars, a bear bar, a bull bar, and then a bear bar. So this is a slight wedge lower high. You can also call it a double top with that high. It's certainly below your stop. And a lot of bears will look to sell again on a reversal down, either here arguing wedge one, two, and then three, or they'll sell below bear bars. And you can see a lot of traders sold here. Selling below the bear bar or selling the breakout bar, betting that we'll get at least a little bit more down. Therefore, swing bears who sold for any reason here or here or here or here are holding short until there's a reasonably good reversal up or until the end of the session. A big bear breakout and a good follow through might get a measured move down, but it's the strongest pair of bear bars more than 20 bars into a bear trend. Therefore, this is more likely an exhaustive end of the bear trend than it is the start of a measured move down. So you have to be prepared for a reversal up. We're getting a bear breakout of a bear channel. Usually that fails within five bars or so. Usually there's at least a small second leg down after a strong breakout like that. And this meets the minimum requirement. We have a bear breakout and a pause, and then we have an attempt at trend resumption even though it's small. This might be the second leg down. So first leg down, a pause, a doji bar, and then a small second leg down. And now we're trying to reverse up. If you're a sell the clothes bear and you sold this clothes and you see this bull bar, what are you thinking? You're thinking, gosh, that's not what I wanted. I don't want a reversal on a breakout to a new low of the day after a bear breakout below a bear channel. Sell the clothes bears will give up. They see a bull bar here closing on its high. They'll buy back their shorts above and aggressive bulls will buy as well for a failed breakout below a channel, a failed breakout below the low of the day. And this is probably a bear leg in a trading range, which means that after it goes down, it will go up. Close on the high. Micro double bottom. Went down on this bar, up on this bar. Down again, up again. So a micro double bottom. Fail breakout low of the day. Fail breakout below the bear channel. I think the bulls will buy and certainly the bears will finally exit here. Too much risk of some kind of a swing up. If you want higher probability, instead of buying above this bull bar, you wait for three or four consecutive bull bars and then you buy closes. The swing bears who sold for any reason, either up here or here. If they get out here and they sold again here, they get out either above this bar or on the third bull close. And the swing bulls who want higher probability, wait for three or four bull closes and then buy the close looking for two legs up. One, pull back two. The bulls who bought after a reversal up like this, they'll put their stop down here and they'll hold as long as the market remains always in long. It probably became always in long on the third bull close, meaning that the market was probably going at least a little higher. We're getting a reversal up from a breakout below a bear channel and below the low of the day. And now we're getting a buy the close rally at the end of the day. Bulls will buy closes. Most bulls will not buy every close, but they'll try to buy at least one close and then either hold until the end of the session or until there's a good reason to exit. Some will buy and buy more two or three buy signals later. For example, they might buy here and hold long and then add to their position here or here, stop down here, looking for a swing up and then they'll exit at the end of the session. A lot of bulls exit below a bear bar. If you have a bear bar closing below its midpoint and you have a buy the close bull trend, a lot of the bulls will get out below the low of the bear bar because sometimes you'll get a violent reversal down. Other bulls know that we're getting a bear break below a bear channel and we're reversing up. 75% chance we're going to the top of the channel and therefore they'll hold long even though it trades below this bar because this did not quite reach the top of the channel. And they assume that we'll get there. If bulls do buy closes and they know the market's probably going to touch the top of the channel, their final buy has to be at least the size of a scalp below their target because the market might reach their target and reverse down and they want to make at least a scalp profit. And therefore, if the market is near a magnet, you don't want to buy unless the distance between your entry price and the target is at least as big as a scalp. You can argue this is by the close as well as all of these bars, and it is. But we have a bigger bar, a buy climax. We're getting a buy vacuum up to resistance. And now, we're very close to resistance. A lot of bulls will not buy that close to resistance because other bulls will be taking profits and aggressive bears will sell, betting that there'll be at least a pullback from resistance. This is not a good buy the close bar because it's right next to resistance. Today, we have a gap up and we have a doji bar and a bull bar not too big and it's followed by a bear bar. The bears tried to sell off and now we have a couple dojis. Can you buy above this bar or above this bar? I think it's probably better to wait for more information. We gapped up. We have a bull bar. It traded a little bit above the bull bar. It traded above that doji, but it immediately reversed down. That is not very bullish. For the bears, we traded below the low of the first bar, a failed breakout of yesterday's high. And then we now have a second sell signal bar and we're trading below is low. So this is the second reversal down from above yesterday's high and it's a decent sell signal bar. This is a reasonable short for a possible high of the day, even though initially we're getting bad follow through. Three consecutive bear bars, two with closes on their lows. The market's always in short. 60% chance that there'll be sellers above the high of the prior bar here or here and that we'll get at least a little bit more down. Once we get that third consecutive close, some bears who did not sell below this bear bar will conclude we're always in short. They'll sell the close of the third consecutive bear bar. Others will sell the reversal up, especially with a weak buy signal bar, betting that it's a weak bull flag, probably more sellers than buyers above the high of this bar, and that will trade down. It does not matter where you short it below this bar, selling that close above the high of this bar. Your stop is above the top of the sell climax, the top of this bear breakout. And you hold short until there's a clear buy signal or until the end of the session. Here we're selling off for about 20 bars, but we're not getting consecutive big bear bars. We get some decent sized bear bars here, here, and here, but look what followed. The follow through is bad, not particularly bearish. So this sell off is probably a bear leg and what will become a trading range, which means it'll probably be followed by a bull leg. There's something interesting about this. We have a bear breakout and then look at this high. It barely pulled above the breakout point, this low or that low. We broke again to a new low and pull back here, did not get above the breakout point there. It did get above this breakout point, but it looks like we're getting a gap there or a slightly negative gap, very little overlap. When you get a weak bear trend like this with bad follow through, but you're getting gaps or negative gaps, gaps where there's slight overlap, you have to be thinking about the possibility that this could become a small pullback bear trend that could last all day. These gaps and negative gaps are important and they increase the chances that even though this is a weak sell off, it might be an endless sell off and the early part of a small pullback bear trend. Eventually, we get a breakout and a very tight bear channel, a relentless sell off. So traders who sold here or here rely on their stop or if they sold here, a double top here, double top here. They hold short. At some point, after a number of bars, maybe here, they tighten their stock to here and they just hold on until the market is likely to reverse. A lot of doji's, barns with very prominent tails and small bodies, but we're getting gaps. And that is a warning that as weak as the bear trend appears to be, it might be much stronger than what you think. Whenever you have a leg that looks like a bare leg in a trading range, but you're getting gaps or negative gaps, you have to be thinking that it might be a bare leg in a small pullback bear trend. Pullback small all day and the trend lasts all day. Again, the bulls are trying to reverse here. They could not close the gap. They could not get above the breakout point. And then they sold off there. This looks like a small pullback bear trend and it could last for the entire day. So better to hold short. We're trying to get some kind of a bottom, maybe a wedge bottom, maybe a failed breakout below a double bottom. But instead of going above the breakout point, we turn back down. Now we have a bear bar, consecutive bear bars, one of the bars being relatively big. We're probably going to get a measured move down. This is probably going to be a measuring gap from this high to that low. Traders will either sell the close of the breakout bar or the close of the follow through bar. Or they'll sell for any reason at the market above bars, sell bear closes, sell bull closes, and use the stop maybe up here at this point. Some bears will sell at the height of the prior bar, betting that it's a small pullback bear trend. And therefore, pullbacks will probably only last one or two or three bars. And then the bear trend will resume. So some bears place limit orders to sell at the height of the prior bar. Again, stop above the most recent strong bear leg. Now we're starting to get consecutive closes in a very tight channel. Some bears will just sell closes, any closes. Here are three, but they could sell any close. They could sell at the market. Other bears prefer stop entry shorts. So they'll sell below low one and low two bear flags. Here we have a small double top bear flag. Therefore, this is a low two and they'll sell below that bar. Here we're trying to reverse up. Therefore, it's a pullback and it's a low one short below its low. Again, here, small double top one, two, this is a low two. Here we're trying to reverse up and instead we broke to the downside. So therefore, it's a low one. Traders do not take all of those trades. Many traders will just take one, especially early on, rely on their stops and then swing trade until the end of the session. Now we're getting extremely strong selling, but about 70 or 80 bars into a bear trend. Is it more likely that the bear trend is suddenly becoming stronger or that this is a final exhaustive sell climax? More likely after 20 or 30 bars in a bear trend, if the trend starts to accelerate and get the biggest bear bars of the entire bear trend, it's a sign that the bear trend will exhaust and reverse. Now we're getting a micro double bottom, down, up, down, up, bull bar closing on its high, bull bar closing near its high. The final bears will exit above this bar, arguing probable exhausting sell climax late in the bear trend. And the bulls will buy with a stop looking for at least a scalp up, a couple legs up, maybe a test to the top of the sell climax. Yesterday ended with a sell to close sell climax, about eight or nine consecutive bear bars, many closing on their lows. And then we have weak follow through, doji, doji, bull bar, doji, doji. The market is uncertain at this point. You can call it an eye-eye pattern, a triangle, small triangle. You can simply call it a tight trading range. Bears will look to sell the bear breakout, betting that we'll get trend resumption down. Bear trend, trading range, at least a little bit more down. It's a low two bear flag because we have a small double top. We went down, we went up, we went down, we went up. Bear trend, trading range, at least a little bit more down. Some bears prefer higher probability and they wait for a bear breakout and follow through and then sell closes. Or they'll sell above the height of the prior bar, betting that the bull reversal will fail. All of these bears have the same stop up here at the top of this most recent bear leg. Now we have a pullback, a reversal attempt, and we have a bear bar closing on its low. Bears will sell on a stop just below its low, betting on at least minimum trend resumption. Stop for the bears selling down here, probably at the top of this sell-off, just above, which is right here. The bears had a very strong bear trend here, but now we're getting a bunch of dojis and a lot of little reversals. This is disappointing for these bears and it increases the chances that we're going to go sideways. A tight bear spike in channel. This is the spike down. These four bars, maybe these eight bars, spike down. And then a pullback. It's a channel, not all that strong. A lot of times when you get a spike in channel pattern, the market will rally and test the top of the channel. This is in such a tight channel that the first reversal up is minor and we're probably still going lower. We're getting a bull breakout above a bear channel. The odds are we're going to go sideways. Can you buy above the high of this inside bar? I think it's not a very high probability buy because the channel down is so tight. It's okay to take profits on shorts. For the bears, we have a very tight bear channel after a strong bear breakout. And now we have a double top at the moving average. We tried to reverse down. We're at the same price. We're trying to reverse down a second time. A small double top like this is always a little too short. We're at the moving average and we have a bear signal bar. It's a reasonable short. We might still go sideways. Here we went sideways for over two hours. Yet we ultimately went down. So the bear is taking that short. Stopped above the high of the entry bar or signal bar. Pretty good buying pressure. We have seven bars and a bull micro channel with five bull bodies. But the bodies are not all that big. Plus it's a 20 gap bar cell. We've been entirely below the moving average for more than 20 bars. And therefore, traders who are selling below the average price will be very happy to sell at the average price, which they got to do here. Other bears prefer higher probability and wait for breakouts and follow through. Every reversal attempt up is probably going to be a bear flag. It'll probably fail. So bears will look to sell on a reversal down, especially below a bear bar. We have a tight trading range. And in that tight trading range, we have a double bottom. Whenever you have a tight trading range in a bear trend and a small double bottom like this, there's maybe a 50% chance that we're going to attempt to get a swing up. And therefore, the bears will exit, especially above a bull bar, like maybe above this bar. We have the double bottom and then a bull bar. And a lot of bulls will take profits above the high of that bull bar. Some bears will sell looking for a reversal back down. We have a breakout above a neckline of a double bottom. Bad follow through. And now we have a second reversal attempt from the breakout above this double bottom neckline. First reversal down failed. Second reversal down, higher probability. Either selling below the bull bar or below one of these two bear bars. Again, stop above the most recent major lower high. The bulls rally strongly here and got a second leg up here. And today's high is slightly above that high. And therefore, we have three reversals down. One, two, three. Even though it does not look like a wedge, it's a wedge top after a bull breakout. Because yesterday ended with a bull breakout, a buy climax, there was a 75% chance of sideways to down trading for two hours starting by the end of the second hour. We got sideways to down trading right on the open. We have two consecutive big bear bars on the failed breakout above yesterday's high. Also a third push up. One, two, three. So it's a wedge high as well. It's a possible spike and channel bear trend. We got a spike, pullback and channel. And we have a second leg down later. But in any case, two consecutive bear bars like that, it's reasonable to sell the close of the second bear bar, taking a chance that it will lead to a bear trend day. Some bears will sell below the low of this bar, arguing wedge one, two, three, fail breakout yesterday's high. Others will start to sell closes after the second or third consecutive bear bar. They have a higher probability short, but their stop is further away. You always pay for higher probability with worse risk reward, which means the stop is usually further away. Can you buy this reversal up after these three bear bars? I would do the opposite. After three decent bear bars, probably the first reversal up will fail. So I'd rather sell at the height of the prior bar. So rather than buying this as a double bottom here or double bottom here, I'm going to look to sell at the height of that bar. Four consecutive sell climaxes. Every trend bar, every series of trend bars is a breakout and a climax. This is a cell climax, a cell climax, a cell climax, a cell climax. Very tight bear channel, and therefore each reversal up probably will be minor. The gaps are closing. We have a breakout point. We went above the high. Breakout point. We went above the high. Here we have an open gap, so possible measure move down. The bears were trying to reverse options. Low one, low two, reasonable to short. It's also a double top. And here you can call it a double top with these two highs or a triangle. In any case, it's a reasonable short, betting on at least a little trend resolution down. So you sell here below that bear bar. The bulls see this as a trading range as well, and therefore they're looking to buy a reversal up. And we have a reversal up here. You can call this a triangle. Reversal down, reversal down, reversal down. I don't have the trend line. But this is a bear break below a channel late in a bear trend. Therefore, most bears will exit on a reversal up. We're rallying here and traders will look for reasons to sell, betting that a trading range is more likely than a bear trend. Different ways to count this. You can count it as a low one, low two, low three. A failed breakout above the top of this tight trading range. The math is reasonable for at least a scalp down. We got a bear breakout, and then we're testing back above the sell entry price, the signal bar low. A lot of bears will sell below that test bar, below this bear bar, betting that the bears failed and that we're going lower. Here's a low two, low one, low two. Okay to sell that. If you take a sell either below this bar or that bar, stop is probably up here because we could get a slightly higher high, fairly common. It's okay to short instead below this bar. I gave some day trading examples for swing trades today and I talked a little bit more about management. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks training course. This is the fourth of five videos on swing trading. while I offer the 42 p.m.