 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading breakouts. I'm going to begin by talking about bull breakouts. And then I want to talk some about buy the close bull trends. Those are the strongest types of bull trends. The market is reversing up here and it has a series of bull bars, several closing on their highs, and the bull bodies are getting bigger. It's obviously a strong bull trend. At the close of this bar, and you had two choices, which would you take? Would you bet that it's going to go down to this low? Or instead, would you bet that it would go that same distance up here? In other words, would you buy this close and put a stop down here, looking to take profits up here? Or would you sell this close and put a stop up here, betting that it would first go back down here? Clearly, the momentum up is very strong. The odds are, if it's going here or here, it more likely will go here before it goes here. And therefore, the bull case is better. The reward for the bulls buying here is the same as the risk. Here's the reward. Here's the risk. The bears who sell here, their risk is here. Their reward is here. They have reward equal to their risk. So for the bulls and bears, both have the same risk and same reward. So they have the same risk reward ratio. But when you look at this, the probability clearly favors the bulls. That means the probability is 60% or more that it's going to go to the bull target before it hits the bull stock. And therefore, with a probability that's high, 60%, it's mathematically okay to take a trade where the reward is equal to one time the risk. Here's the reward is equal exactly to the risk. But because the probability is 60% or higher, the math is okay. The traders equation is positive. Easier to make money buying because the probability is greater, even though the risk and reward is the same for the bulls and the bears. One of the difficult things traders have is they're surprised by how quickly the market's going up. And they panic and they cannot decide, oh my gosh, it's going up. But look how far away my stop has to be. You have to develop the habit of being comfortable with that and trading appropriately small so that your risk is no greater than on any of the trade. The most important thing is when you see it going up like that and you say, oh my gosh, I'm getting nervous. I know it's going up, but I don't want to risk that much. Buy small, just buy something, but you have to get long. And in this case, this is what followed. I'm always looking for signs of a strong trend. Here we have a bull trend. And therefore I'm looking for signs of how strong the bull trend is. Here we have a pair of bull bars, both closing on their highs. The open of this bar is at the close of that bar. The open of this bar is at the close of that bar. As soon as this bar closed, a lot of traders therefore bought the market. And you can see the pullback from that close is very small. The pullback from this close is small. The pullback from this close is small. That means as soon as the bar closes, more traders are buying than selling. Consecutive strong bull bars. By strong bull bars, I mean decent size or big bodies and the bars closing near their highs. Closing on the high or only a very small tail on the top of the bar. That is a sign that the bulls are very eager to buy. Good buying pressure. And therefore, when you see this and you look to the left, the context is good for higher prices. So you look at this. Here's the context. A bull bar closing on its high following a series of good bull bars. That is good context for the bulls. And therefore, they'll buy expecting higher prices. What you don't see on this chart is the past several days. And this is what the past several days look like. This is where we are right here. And you can see we're at the bottom of a trading range. And we have an expanding triangle and a bull trend. So it's an expanding triangle bull flag. We reversed up here from a new low. We have a new low here and we're starting to reverse up. This is another reason to buy. So if you saw the past several days, you would see that we are exactly at the bottom of an expanding triangle. It's important always to remember the market cycle. Only about 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout phase. Most 2-3 bar breakouts are part of a trading range or broad channel. Only 5% of the bars on any chart are the strong breakout at the start of a trend. And that's what we have here. And you can see this, whatever you want. 2 bars, 4 bars, 5 bars, compared to 100 bars on the screen. Very important to decide early. And it's also helpful to anticipate. You see that we're reversing up from a break below a range. And if you look back at the past several days, you saw that we're at the bottom of a range in a bull trend. And therefore, you have to be expecting a reversal up. When you see it begin to happen, do not deny it. You have to try to get long as early as you possibly can. As soon as you start to feel that, oh my gosh, I want a pullback, that tells you that you have to get long and don't wait for the pullback. Here we have a pair of very big bull bars breaking above the high of the day, closing on their highs. Odds are we're going up for at least a measured move based upon the height of these bars. You can argue that we gapped down, we sold off, and then we rallied a little bit, and this is a bear flag. But here we're clearly breaking above the top of a bear flag. We're getting a bull breakout above a bear flag. The bulls are taking control. Strong follow through after the breakout. The close of this bar above the high of the day, closing on the high of the bar. In the second bar, now we have consecutive strong bull trend bars. The odds are high, 60% or more, that we're going up for some kind of a measured move. Minimum target is the open of the first bar of the breakout to the close of the second bar of the breakout, which is somewhere up here. Good context, reversing up from below yesterday's low. There are all kinds of ways to buy, and it doesn't matter which way you choose. All that matters is you have to get long. You have to choose one of the ways. And if you cannot decide, and you're starting to panic and saying, oh my gosh, my stop is far away. I know I need to get long. I'm waiting for a pullback. As soon as you start saying, I'm waiting for a pullback, buy. You know where the stop has to be. It has to be down here. So you just buy and you trade a small enough position so that you can put your stop down here. That's the easiest way to buy. You've got five consecutive bull bars at this point. You're starting to form a sixth one. You can just buy at the market. Some traders will press their bets, which means they buy more, and they'll buy at new highs, betting that instead of getting profit taking at the new high, the market's going to go higher. That's another way to buy. So you buy the breakout to a new high. We have a strong bull trend. We pull back. The bull trend is resuming. Buy above the high. Buy above the prior high. You do that in strong breakouts. If the market is in a weak bull channel, you'll take profits on your longs at new highs and bears will sell at new highs. But nowhere in this entire chart was the market weak enough for the bulls to be selling new highs and for the bears to be selling at prior highs for a short. You can buy the close of any bar, like a bull bar. But you can also buy the close of bear bars, betting that the reversal down will fail. You can buy above the high of the prior bar. Here we pull back for a bar. This high is above the high of that bar. You can place a stop to buy above this bar and you get filled here. Or you can buy a high 2 buy. Two legs down, one, pull back two. And you have a bull bar. Buy on a stop above the high of this bar and get filled here. You can buy below a bar. Here's a second entry short. This bar went below that bear bar. So that's the first entry short. And now we have a micro double top. And this would be a second entry short, betting on a failed breakout. But you know the probability is that we're going higher. And therefore, it makes more sense to buy at the low of this bar and you get filled right here. Betting that the bear reversal will fail and become a bull flag and that the bull trend will resume. You can buy a strong bear close, betting that it'll be a failed reversal attempt. So the market's in a strong bull breakout. It's spending most of its time at the high of the breakout. The market just keeps going up and up and up. And the beginners are always worried about risk. So if you're buying any of these opportunities, your stop is down here. And the beginner looks at that and says, wow, you know, that's 10 points down. I don't want to risk 10 points. If you cannot risk 10 points, do not take the trade. But if you are able to risk the appropriate amount, in this case, it would be about 10 points, and then take the trade because the probability is very high that you're going to make money. And that you'll make a reward that's at least as big as your initial risk. And therefore, you have a positive trader's equation. Some beginners don't buy, and they're hoping for a pullback because they want a smaller stop. So for example, some beginner might not buy any of this, and then they'll buy the high two bull flag and put a stop below the bottom of the high two bull flag. That's okay. But you ended up missing a lot of the trade. And it's possible that this pullback might not have come until the market was much higher. So you're risking missing a good trade. You don't get a pullback until experts start to take profits. Why would anybody take profits here? Because they bought down here and their stop is far away. Their risk is big and they want to reduce their risk. And then they take profits. If the market does not reverse down very much, they'll look to buy again on reversal up. For example, a high two bull flag. High one, high two. All of these entries look good enough for experts. And they're buying for any reason, knowing that all reversal attempts will probably fail, and that the trend might go a long way before there is any pullback. If you don't buy, don't buy, don't buy, waiting for a pullback, you might not get this pullback until the market is way up here, in which case you may have missed a huge bull trend. Even waiting until this point, you still missed a lot of the bull trend. There's never a reason to miss a strong trend like this. The market's clearly always in long. It's clearly more likely to go higher than lower. And therefore you have to buy. And when you look at this, you know where the stop has to be. It has to be down here below the bottom of everything. It's possible that if you buy up here, you can put a stop below the two bar breakout, or below the four bar breakout. But technically, the ideal stop is down here. It's okay to use the tighter stop after you see this close, because if this is the start of a bull trend, probably 90% chance it's not going to come down below this two bar breakout. And therefore the math is okay to use that tighter stop. Stop either below the bottom of the bull breakout, or below the bottom of the bull trend. If you buy late, I think you could also put a stop below the bottom of this two bar bull breakout. But to me, I initially, typically put my stop down here. I'm not going to let the stop get hit. If it starts to reverse down, I'll get out earlier usually. But I need a starting point. And to me, the best starting point is below the bottom of the bull trend. At this point, we don't know if the market's going to be in a bull trend, or a trading range where the market could have a very deep pullback. We do know the odds are it will not be in a bear trend unless it trades down and trades up and gets some kind of a double top. And therefore, because of the possibility that this ends up as a bull leg and a trading range, you need the wide stop, because the trading range can have a very deep pullback, even below this low. However, it should not get below this low. It doesn't matter where you buy. You know where the stop is, and you can calculate what your risk is. You have to trade small enough so that the risk is acceptable. And if you're thinking about possibly adding on, if there is in fact a very deep pullback, you have to trade small enough so that the combined risk from your additional position is no greater than on any other trade. Let's say you bought the close of the second bar. Clearly, at this point, the market has a very high probability of going higher, and at least a 60% probability of going up for some kind of a measured move. Put the stop below the bottom of the bull trend. Or possibly below the bottom of this very strong bull breakout. Or as I said, you could also put it below the bottom of these two bull bars, because if your premise is right that this is the start of a bull trend, it will not get below these two bull bars. However, as I said, it could drop below these two bull bars, and at that point it would be in a trading range. And you don't want to get stopped out there because chances are it'll still come back up here. And therefore, that's really not a great stop. It's a good stop if you're only willing to hold on if it remains in a strong bull trend, but you're not willing to hold on if it's going to be in a trading range. If it drops below here, it's probably in a trading range. For some traders that look at this and say, gosh, you know, I really want to buy, but I can't risk all the way down here. I can't even risk here. Well, you can use a tighter stop. Typically, traders will buy a 50% pullback. Here's a very strong bull breakout. Traders will buy a 50% pullback. You could put a stop slightly below 50%, or you can say, well, this breakout bar is so strong. I don't want it to drop below that bar. And therefore, if you want, you could use a stop below the low of that bar. Whenever you use a tighter stop, you improve your risk reward ratio. Anytime you have a better risk reward ratio, what does that do to probability? It always reduces the probability of making money. Mathematically, it's probably okay to use any of these stops, but I think the best trader's equation comes from using the wide stop. You could use a money stop. For example, here's five points from here to here. You could put a stop five points down. Or as I said, you could put a stop a little bit more than a 50% pullback. A 50% pullback of this two bar breakout, or a 50% pullback of the entire rally. Again, if you use a tighter stop, you're going to lose more often, but you'll lose less. A wider stop, you lose a lot when you do lose, but you lose less often. It doesn't matter which stop you use. If they're both reasonable and you take a hundred trades, you're going to make as much money using the tighter stops as you do using the wider stops. Can you buy here and risk two ticks? Can you buy here and risk a hundred points far below the bottom of the screen? No, because neither one of those is reasonable. They're both unreasonable. If you use an unreasonable stop, it's a losing strategy. You will lose money. Some traders prefer high probability and they'll use the wider stop. Other traders are very concerned about risk and they'll use the tighter stop. As long as the stop is reasonable, it's a good strategy. I said there are lots of reasons to buy and you can buy for any reason at the market, at the market, above bar, above bar, below bar, above a new high. It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter which of these entries you take. The stop is the same. It's all the same trade. You're buying a bull breakout and the stop for all of them is the same. Once you start to reverse up strongly, you can use the tighter stop, but at least initially for any of these entries, the stop is down here or one of these stops. But for me, I would use the wider stop. The location of your stop never depends on where you enter. The entry price has nothing to do with the stop. The stop has to do with what took place to the left, not the time that you enter. Once there's a strong breakout, maybe two or three bull bars, three or four bull bars, you raise your stop to below the bottom of the most recent strong leg up. This becomes a major higher low. Major because as long as the market stays above this higher low, the bull trend is intact. If it falls below a major higher low like this, then it's no longer a bull trend. It's then either a trading range or a bear trend. If you're buying on the premise that it's a bull trend and it falls below this low, your premise is no longer valid. And therefore, you do not want to be long. You want to get out and then reassess. After every strong breakout, you raise your stop. That's called trailing your stop to below the bottom of the most recent strong bull breakout. I've got another breakout. It's less strong, but I would still raise my stop usually to the bottom of the entire rally. However, if the trend is strong, it should not fall below the bottom of this little breakout. So this is a reasonable stop as well. This is a lot of trading range price action and the market might be evolving into a trading range. Is this a major higher low? I don't think so. I think this is probably more of the major higher low. In general, it's better to put your stop below the most recent major higher low if you are trading it like a bull trend. If you're buying here looking for a scalp, then you're not really trading it like a bull trend. Therefore, you might use a tighter stop. However, if the market is up here and it falls below a major higher low. If it's up here and it falls below a major higher low. If it's up here and it falls below a major higher low. Then your premise of a strong bull trend is no longer valid. The market is now something else like a trading range or a bear trend. If you're holding long because you believe it's a bull trend and now you have evidence that it's no longer a bull trend, you have to get up and therefore it makes sense to get stopped up below a major higher low. A very strong bull trend is a buy the close bull trend. It's the kind of trend where as soon as a bar closes, traders are looking to buy. When you see a strong bull trend like this, the easiest way to buy is as soon as the bar closes, you just hit buy the market. Or sometimes you can place a limit order if you're fast enough. As soon as that bar closes, you place a limit order to buy at that close hoping to get maybe a tick better price. In general, it's simply better just to buy the market. The close of a strong bull bar, buy the close, buy the close, buy the close, buy the close. And that is a buy the close bull trend as is this. Let's say you bought the very worst close. Let's say you bought here instead of here or here. Your stop is still down here. Your risk is small in that, yes, the actual point value is big, but the probability of getting hit is small. So your actual risk is probably going to be small. Buying closes all the way up. As soon as the bar closes, you hit buy the close. As soon as the bar closes, you hit buy the close. Usually get filled on the open of the next bar. Some traders will buy the close once and then just hold. Other traders will buy the close and then they get another buy signal. They'll buy more. They'll buy more. They'll buy more. They'll buy more. You obviously can only do that if the position size does not create too much risk for your account. Some traders will buy the close and then scalp out and then they'll look for another strong close and buy again. As long as you're getting a series of consecutive good sized bull bodies with the bars closing on their highs, it's a buy the close market. Usually you need three or four bull bars before you decide that it's a buy the close bull trend. One of my goals in life, although I've never done it, is once I see a buy the close bull trend, just keep buying every close until it's no longer a buy the close bull trend. I don't know if I'll ever do that. Usually I have a big enough position early on so that I don't want to be increasing my position. But at least that's one of my fantasies in life that someday I'll just buy a close, buy a close, buy a close and end up buying 10 closes and I'll buy the close bull trend or sell 10 closes and I'll sell the close bear trend. I'll probably never do it because it would generate more risk than what I like ever having. When a buy the close bull trend forms in the final hour, traders have to be very quick to exit and I talk about this in the video on trading at the end of the day. When the market's in a buy the close bull trend, there's a lot of profit potential. Some traders just get scared and they don't want to buy closes because they see the stop is far away and they just wait for a pullback. But by the time you get a pullback, it'll begin to look like the market might be reversing. Three highs, reverse down, reverse down, reverse down. Maybe this is a parabolic wedge. And so they end up not making any profit because they did not buy the closes when it made sense to buy closes. When they finally get their pullback, they don't buy because they think the market might be reversing. It's better just to trade small, buy the close and use the appropriate stop. It's like when you're a kid and you're jumping off the high board. You're terrified. You pinch your nose. You tighten up every muscle in your body and you're in a tight ball and just jump. And then after a second or two, you're safe. That's true with these buy the close bull trends. You buy the close, you pinch your nose and you're tense for a minute or so. And then all of a sudden you're safe. The market is always in a cycle. It's in a strong breakout. It's in the channel or it's in a trading range. As soon as you see the market in a breakout phase, that is a great time to enter because the math is very good for traders trading in the direction of the trend. High probability, even though the risk is greater, the probability of making money is very high if you manage your trade correctly. Again, you buy for any reason. You buy at the market, you buy below bars, you buy above bars, you buy bear closes. It doesn't matter. And then just use the appropriate stop. Once you get a strong enough breakout, you tighten your stop to below the most recent bottom of a bull breakout. Beginners always want perfect trades. They don't want to risk any money unless they're absolutely sure they're going to make money. That cannot happen. You should assume that you're never going to be more than 60% certain and you cannot be paralyzed by the 40% chance that you're going to lose money. 60% is as good as it gets. Realistically, is the probability 60% that we're going up for a measured move after you see this? Yeah, it's actually probably 70%, but it's clearly much better than 50%. And that's as good as it gets. So you know what the risk is. And if your account size is big enough to risk that, you got to buy for any reason. If you're waiting for a pullback and it's not coming and you're thinking that maybe I'm taking too long to enter, just buy at the market. Buy at the market. It doesn't matter if you're buying higher than you want. Just buy at the market. Use the appropriate stop. Once you start getting pullbacks, a pullback is a bar going below the low of the prior bar. Look to buy on a resumption of the bull trend. Buying above the high of the prior bar, that's a high one buy. If the pullback bear trend resumes down and you get another bar going above the high of the prior bar, that is a high two buy. So a high one bull flag or a high two bull flag, very good ways to enter in a strong bull trend. Sometimes you get a high three. So high one, high two, high three. You can call it a triangle. It's sloped down a little bit. You can call it a wedge bull flag. That doesn't matter. It's still a very good buy. The bears have not done enough to take control. And therefore the probability is we're going higher. There's a high one buy. High two buy. High two buy. You don't have to take both. You just choose one and then rely on your stop, either here or here. High one, high two, high three. It doesn't matter which one you take. Your stop is below the bottom of the most recent strong bull breakout, down here. Sometimes the trend is very strong and you get a high one and it goes right up. And then a high one, it goes straight up. As trends mature, as they go on, as they add more bars, the pullbacks tend to be more complex. So instead of high ones, you start to get high twos or high threes. We're trying to reverse. Do you think that's a major reversal? Do you think we're going to bear a trend out of that? No, it's a minor reversal. And therefore it's more likely to create a bull flag or a small trading range. And the bull trend is likely to resume. Therefore, you bet that reversals will fail. Here we're trying to reverse. A failed breakout of this high. We're trying to reverse a second time. Now we have a bear breakout. A close below the low of the past three bars. These are reversal attempts. They're going to fail. Instead of selling, you buy. Here we have a failed breakout. We have a wedge. One, two, three wedge top. You look to buy reversals down. Here's a second entry short. First entry below that bull bar. And now a second entry here. A micro double top. It's probably going to fail. So you buy below the low of that bar. Here we've got a two bar reversal up and down. A failed high two buy. High one. High two. Maybe high three. And it's failing. Well, guess what? The first strong bear bar is probably going to fail to reverse the market. Bulls will buy that close. Again, we have a small double top. But a doji bar. You're going to buy the low of that bar. Or you're going to buy that small bear bar. Betting that it's not going to be enough to reverse the market. So you buy the close of bear bars. You buy below bars. You buy below the bar. Betting that the attempt to reverse down will fail. You buy a breakout to a new low. This bear bar closed below the low of the past six or seven bars. Is it going to be a successful reversal? No. The odds of it being successful are small. And therefore it's going to fail. And the bull trend will resume. These are all reasonable entries. And it doesn't matter which of these entries you take. Your stop is here. It doesn't matter which of these entries you take. The stop is here. You know where the stop is. And if you can risk enough. Then you just take the trade. Strong leg up. Traders will buy a 50% pullback. We did not get there here. However, a lot of traders will place a limit order to buy a 50% pullback. Some traders will simply buy one point below a low. This low is one point below that low. So instead of buying at the low of that bar. They'll place a limit order to buy one point below. Or if the pullbacks are getting deeper. They'll buy two points, three points or four points below. They'll buy one, two or three points below the low of the prior bar. Or they'll buy one, two or three points below the low of the high close. We have a buy the close market. The bulls have bought that high close. We'll look to buy more lower. They might face a limit order to buy one point down, two points down, three points down. Betting that whatever reversal we get will not be enough to reverse the trend. And that we'll get back to that close. Again, it doesn't matter how you buy. It doesn't matter what your reason is. When the trend is very strong like this. The math is actually okay to scalp. But the math is really good for swing traders. Therefore, you should try to swing at least part of your position. Always using the correct stop. By any of these reasons. Stop either here or down here. And you just hold until either there's a reasonable sell signal. Or until the end of the day. Beginners always want perfect trades. A perfect trade is a trade where you have a high probability. And you're going for a great risk reward. In other words, very little risk and very big reward. Now that can never exist. Because if it's perfectly good for you. It's perfectly bad for the institution taking the opposite side. If you have a high probability of a very big profit with very little risk. No one's going to take the other side of the trade. It will not take long for the institutions to recognize the setup. And then everyone will want to do exactly what you're doing. And there won't be anybody left to take the other side of the trade. And therefore a trade that gets anywhere near perfection. Cannot exist. Because everyone would start to trade it. And all of a sudden there will not be enough people to take the other side. If it's perfectly good for you. It's perfectly bad for an institution doing the opposite. In other words. They would have only a very small probability. Of making only a very small profit. Yet their risk would be very big. Nobody would take that trade. There are three variables in the traders equation. Risk, reward and probability. And you can combine risk reward into a single variable. Every trade is a trade off between probability and risk reward. A lot of trades have decent probability and decent risk reward. Some trades have high probability. Those trades always have bad risk reward. Other trades have great risk reward. And therefore they always have low probability. If you have high probability of winning. The other side has better risk reward. If you have great risk reward. Then your probability of success is small. Let's say you buy the reverse low from yesterday's low. It's the second entry buy. The first was above here. The second is here. You stop is small. At that point you do not see all of these bars. You have a very small risk. You have potentially a very big reward. So you have fantastic risk reward. What does that tell you about the probability at that point of making a lot of money? It tells you that you're probably not going to make money. That your stop will probably get hit. But sometimes it'll work. And those few times when you get a huge trend like this. It more than offsets all of the losses. Even if you lost 70 or 80% of the time taking this buy. The 20% of the time that you win. Has so much profit that it more than offsets all of the losses. Is this only a 20% chance of winning? No, it's actually probably about a 40% chance. You have a failed breakout below yesterday's low. Trying to reverse up here. And now you have a second entry for the failed breakout above yesterday's low. You have dojis. That tends to lower the probability. But the risk is small. The reward is good. You have about a 40% chance of a swing up. By a swing up the minimum goal is at least twice your actual risk. That means your minimum goal for this to be a profitable strategy is a move to right around here. However, exiting at the minimum goal is rarely the best option. And if you see the market start to turn up reasonably strongly. It's better not to exit and hold at least part of your position. Because you might be buying early on in a very strong bull trend. This bull had a 40% chance of a swing up. What about this bull? They have the same stop. Whether you bought here with a stop here. Or you buy here with a stop here. This bull, the risk is far greater. His risk reward ratio is much worse. This bull had a great risk reward ratio. But low probability. This bull has a terrible risk reward ratio. But outstanding probability. Both are reasonable trades. The trader who buys here is a trader who prefers high probability trades. The trader who buys here is one who has risk reward as his priority. Again, you should never worry about perfection because it cannot exist. As long as you can structure a trade that has a positive trader's equation, the trade is good and you should consider taking it. I began by talking about bull breakouts. And then I moved on to talk about very strong bull breakouts. Buy the close bull trends. The important message is once you think that a bull trend is strong, you have to buy. Even if you're simply buying at the market. You know where the stop has to be. Trade small enough so that you can use the correct stop. But you have to get long. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading breakouts. Thank you. Right, as it s been located in the near 30 to 70 BC. I want you to be thinking about 5 billion more and extra feet of your speed of your speed. You have to show up where the tough pull comes out of each current stage. First metres will be available to start and choose if you have a football set.