 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. I'm going to be talking about personality traits of successful traders in this video. I'll begin by talking about the traits that great traders have. Next, I'll talk about the importance of avoiding doing stupid things. And finally, I'll talk about the importance of being comfortable with uncertainty. You're never going to be as certain as you would like to be with anything in the market, and you have to learn to be comfortable with that. Great traders obviously are disciplined. They're objective. They're patient. As I said, they have to be comfortable with uncertainty because you're never going to be completely certain. There always has to be an institution believing the other side of what you believe to take the other side of the trade. Also, it's really important to become a great manager of your trade. Once the trade is on, you have to be able to do the right thing. When I talk about discipline, I talk about doing what is right, even when you do not want to do it. Traders oftentimes look at a market and take a trade thinking, well, maybe this time it'll work. And a disciplined trader never says just this time maybe it'll work. A disciplined trader only takes trades that he thinks make sense, and he doesn't deviate from that. For example, we got two legs down, one pullback two, and maybe this is a sell climax, and maybe I should buy. Maybe the V bottom will work this time. I know the probability is in a tight bear channel with small pullbacks, it won't, but maybe it will. So maybe I'll buy the high of this bar, just above the high of that bar, and maybe I'll have a huge win. I know I'm taking a low probability trade, but my risk is small. My stop is here, and maybe I'll make all this profit. So I have a great risk reward profile, and I don't care about probability. You know, maybe this time it'll work, right? There's never a maybe this time. You take a trade because you think it makes sense, and because it's consistent with the style of trading that you always use. Don't deviate from that. Don't say maybe this time it'll be different. If you normally only take high probability trades, don't take a low probability trade this time. It's really important to make sure that you don't let your emotions interfere with your trading decisions. If you feel anything, confused, agitated, upset, impatient, greedy, fearful, it doesn't matter. If you feel anything at all, then just wait. And it's very important to accept that no matter how confident you are that the market will do something, in 40% of the cases, it'll do the exact opposite. Don't feel that you're absolutely right and that something will work. And again, if you don't feel perfectly normal, don't take the trade. And certainly, if you are taking a trade, always be open to the possibility that the market will do the exact opposite. It's really important to be patient. Sometimes it can take an hour, two hours, three hours for a good trade to set up. Don't feel that you have to rush and take a trade. You trade what is there, and you do not trade if what you want is not there. So for example, pretty tight trading range, weak bull channel, low probability trading, mostly limit order trading, buying below bars, selling above bars, higher probability to wait for a strong breakout, or the follow through after a strong breakout and then sell. Yes, the stop is further away, so the risk is greater, but the probability of making money, if you sell at that close, or as soon as it closes, the open at the next bar, the probability of making money is high. A trade is never overdue, but one always eventually comes. If you are a high probability trader, then you wait for a high probability trade. These are not high probability trades. These are risk reward trades. A small risk, big reward, but low probability. If you prefer high probability, you wait for a big breakout and good follow through. As soon as that bar closes, sell the market. You get filled right here. One of the important things is learning how to avoid doing stupid things. When traders start out, they often get excited and they rely more on hope and emotion instead of objectivity. For example, they'll look at this and say, ah, we have three pushes up. One, two, three. So it's a wedge top. And Al says it's always good to sell wedge tops. We got a bear breakout. And maybe this is a pullback from that breakout, slightly higher high. You can also call it a double top, a higher high double top. So maybe I'll sell that reversal down. And the beginner ignores the reality that there are eight consecutive bull bars here and six bars without a pullback. And that makes this a very low probability trade. All the beginner sees is, well, if I sell here, my stop is here and I'm not risking very much. Plus my reward maybe is here, maybe more. So I have fantastic risk reward. One of the common things that all beginners do is they get excited and they ignore the third variable probability. Whatever the risk reward ratio is fantastic as it is here. Chances are you're going to lose money. So here we have a second entry short. We tried to sell here. We try to sell here. So it's a slightly higher high version of a double top. So maybe it's an even higher probability short, but it's not. We have eight consecutive bull bars. You should wait for either a series of bear bars and then sell or a micro double top and then sell. And the beginner knows this. The beginner sees this and knows that the chances of reversal are small, but all he thinks about is risk reward. Small risk, big reward. I'll take the trade. And you know, he knows that he has a pretty good chance of losing money. He senses that it's not a great trade, but he does it anyway because he knows the risk is small and beginners only think about risk. So if a trade has low risk, the beginner will take the trade, even though the probability might be very low. And when the beginner takes the trade, it often takes him a long time to correct his mistakes. Again, he knows the probability is that he won't make money. That means the probability is that he will lose money. He still takes the trade, hoping that the market will do what he desperately wants it to do. He wants the great risk reward to pay off. But it's a bad trade. An experienced trader would rarely ever take this trade. Great risk reward, but terrible probability. The bulls look at this as a double bottom, a higher low double bottom or broad bull channel. High, high, higher, low, higher, low, higher, low. So they see this as a broad bull channel and they see this as a pretty strong leg up. So they think the wedge top will probably fail. Again, we have eight consecutive bull bars going up here. And at this point, it's an eight bar bull micro channel, eight bars without a pullback. That is a very low probability short. Look at the cell signal bar. It's a doji, plus it's following another doji. So not much selling pressure. Again, very low probability to take this cell. Also, look at this sell off. It's not as strong as this rally. More overlapping bars, more small bars. And it's also not as strong as this rally. So to bet that the bears are suddenly going to get strong is a low probability bet. That means this is probably going to be a minor reversal, a bull flag or a bull leg in a trading range. Low probability of making money. More likely going to be a pullback. And then the trend will probably resume up. So it's not a good wedge top to sell. Bad habits like taking trades that you get excited to take because the risk reward is fantastic. Bad habits are hard to correct. A habit is result of behaviors that we use to function in the rest of our lives. We all have lots of habits and we like them. They're functional. The good habits are functional. They help us do well. They protect us. They make us happy. And as a result, we don't want to let them go. That is true with trading as well. So selling a wedge top, you really want to have it work, even though you know it's a low probability bet in this kind of context, but you take it anyway. Not only do you take it today, you take it again next week and the week after and the week after. And you keep taking it because it's hard to correct bad habits. But this is what is much more likely the bull trend will continue up. If you make a mistake like that, even experienced traders sometimes do dumb things like this, stupid things like this. But experienced traders, as soon as they realize that they made a mistake, they get out. Let's say an experienced trader took that short. He might get out two or three ticks later, two seconds later, five seconds later, and lose very much. And lose very, very little. But a beginner often holds onto the position all the way up hoping that maybe it'll come down. It's too far up. It's climactic. Maybe it's another kind of wedge. One, two, three. Maybe it's a parabolic wedge. And he just ends up losing an incredible amount of money. So his low risk trade turned into a high risk. As I said, an experienced trader quickly recognizes when he does something stupid and he admits it to himself. He does not punish himself. He just fixes it. He knows that the trade was probably self-indulgent and he just gets out. And he takes the loss and he doesn't care. He just moves on to the next trade. He might get out right above the high of that bear bar. It's a breakout pullback buy, a high one buy, and a pretty strong rally. I always think of the market with respect. And I think you have to look at it as if it's a parent or a grandparent or any other elder. You've got to be respectful of it. And also, for me, if I ever did something disrespectful or selfish when I was with an uncle or a grandparent or a parent, I would feel terrible. And I would be very quick to fix what I did. I would be disgraced. I would immediately stop doing what I'm doing. And I would go on to do something else to make up for my bad behavior. And because I'm so respectful of them, I just can't imagine ever being so self-indulgent when I'm with an elder, someone that I should respect. And if I do anything wrong, I fix it immediately. So if I make a mistake shorting here, I'm not going to get out here. I'll get out above this bar or on this bull close or the follow through bull bar. I got to listen to what the market is telling me. It's telling me that the market wants to go up. If anything, I have to get out at a minimum and try to get long and start buying closes somewhere in here. Maybe I get out above this bar and wait a bar or two and then start buying closes. Markets have been around forever. People have been trading between one another since man has been around tens of thousands of years. And markets have become perfected over time. Now they're really, really good. And just like an elder, the markets have been around a long time and I think they deserve our respect. And you have to treat them appropriately. And they have behaved really consistently over thousands of years. And to treat them disrespectfully, you're going to lose money. So the bears are sold here. They finally give up. See this big bar here? This is the bears finally giving up. They're just buying back their shorts and taking their loss. As I said, I look at the market as I would any person deserving of respect, especially someone who's done something really well for a very long time. So if I do something wrong, I'm going to quickly fix what I did, even if it costs me money. One of the most important things as a trader is becoming comfortable with uncertainty. Only 10% of the bars on the chart have really high probability, a strong breakout. 90% of the bars on the chart are either in a channel or trading range. And the probability that the market will go up or down fluctuates between 40 and 60%. So 90% of the bars look like this. The market's pretty much going sideways. Bear channel, bull channel, bear channel. Breakout with bad follow through. Bear breakout, weak follow through. And that means that the probability being between 40 and 60% during 90% of the day, you're living with constant uncertainty. And uncertainty is the only thing that's certain. Likewise, knowing how to live with insecurity, risk of losing money is the only security. You have to be comfortable with taking risks, appropriate risks. Most trading is unclear and rarely is it more than 60% certain. You get clarity during strong breakouts when there are strong breakouts with follow through. But on any chart, that's only 10% of the bars on the chart. Here we've got a few bars with a very strong breakout. The probability is we're going higher. But during these bars, only 40% to 60% chance we're going up, 40% to 60% chance we're going down. As a trader, you cannot be afraid of losses. You have to trade small enough so that if you do lose, you don't get upset. Losses are inevitable. Even great traders lose money. A really good scalper is still going to lose 10% of the time. Losses are inevitable. Even though some things are relatively high probability, nothing is really clear real time. But at the end of the day, if you printed a chart out, everything is perfectly clear. However, you don't get to trade knowing what all the bars to the right look like. When you're taking a trade, there's always going to be uncertainty. You're never going to be more than 60% certain. Maybe during a strong breakout, you might be 70% certain. Another thing that's really important is you have to be comfortable with what you're doing. You want to do this for many years. You want this to be your career. And it has to be fun. So you can't be stressed out and worried and upset and agitated all the time. You have to find a way to trade that allows you to be relaxed, comfortable, happy. You're always going to be a little bit stressed when you have a trade on. That's natural. But it can't be so stressful that it's really unpleasant. You want to do this for years. So you've got to make sure that you're trading in a way that's compatible with your personality. It often takes a few years to find out exactly what your personality is and what style of trading you should be doing. There are lots and lots of ways to make money as a trader. If you see somebody on television trading one particular way, don't feel that that is the way that you have to trade. You have to find something that works for you and something that's comfortable for you. And unfortunately, it takes a long time to figure it out. You can quickly learn lots of styles of trading, scalping, swing trading, fading, buying breakouts, selling bear breakouts. There are all kinds of things that you can do using indicators, using dome trading, all kinds of ways to trade profitably. But that does not mean you're comfortable using any of those ways. You've got to find a way, a timeframe, a style of trading that works for you. And it takes a few years to really figure it out. Sometimes you get lucky and you do pretty well inside of six months, but it really takes a few years to get, I think, really comfortable with what you're doing. And you also have to study a lot. That's one of the reasons why this course has so many videos. There's a lot to learn. You don't have to learn all of it at once, but you need to put the time in. A lot of websites make it sound like you just study for an hour or two and you're going to make money. That's not going to happen. You're trading against really smart people with a lot of experience. And for you to make money, they have to lose money. They've been doing it a long time and they don't want to lose money. And they're very good at not losing money. So you have to get good too. On those websites that make it sound like you study for an hour or two or three or for a week or two, and that's all you need. That's not true. Whenever you think that you're totally done, the Navy SEALs rule is if you think you're done, you're really only 40% done. There's still a lot more to learn. Most traders starting out find it easier to make money if they begin looking for swing trades, looking for big moves. But if you are a swing trader, you need to accept certain things. Remember, you're looking for a big reward. Big reward relative to risk means the probability is less. In general, when you take a swing trade, you only have about a 40% chance of making a big profit, a swing profit. That means you're going to be having small losses or small gains 60% of the time. Only 40% of the time, you're really going to be achieving your goal of a big gain. Most of the time, you're going to be losing or basically break even. You have to be able to hold your position for a long time. Here, you have to hold through 10 or 15 bars in a tight trading range. And the market constantly tries to reverse, bull reversal, second entry buy. Lots of bull reversal attempts here. Yet, your fundamental premise is still unchanged. We have a bear breakout and none of these bars is going above the top of the bear breakout. You have to have a personality that would allow you to hold for a big gain despite the constant reversal attempts. Scalpers, on the other hand, need a high probability when they trade. They're going for a reward that's small relative to risk, maybe about the same size as the risk. And that means they have to win very frequently. A really good scalper can win 90% of the time. And because most traders cannot win 90% of the time, most traders should not scalp. As a scalper, your risk reward is bad. Your risk and reward are about equal instead of the reward being many times bigger than the risk. So you have bad risk reward and you need high probability. And that means you have to be good at finding high probability trades. And a lot of times they happen pretty quickly. So you have to make very quick decisions. Most traders cannot do that long term. By long term, I mean years. If you're going to be trading for years, you have to be comfortable doing what you're doing for years. And because scalping is a very difficult way to make a living, most traders should focus on swing trades. And the simplest definition of a swing trade is a trade where the reward is at least twice the risk. Some traders are comfortable trading in all environments. They take high probability trades. They take low probability trades. They swing some of the time. Sometimes they swing part of their position, scalp part of their positions. They're comfortable all the time. Whether they swing and scalp. Here they sell below the bear bar. Reversal below the moving average. Here they sell below the bear bar. It's below the moving average. They know the probability is not high at this point. But the reward is big relative to the risk. So it's okay to swing. And then they see the market enter a trading range. And they stop swing trading and they switch to scalping. They say, well, that's not a very good looking sales setup. So maybe I'll buy below the low. This is a pretty good reversal up. Chances are we're in a trading range. If we go to a new low below that low, the bear breakout will fail. So I'll place a limit order to buy there. And I'll buy betting on a bounce. And if you did buy here, maybe you say, oh, it's been below the moving average. A lot of bars. Maybe I'll just scalp out here. Bear might sell here. First touch of the moving average and a lot of bars. Not a particularly strong reversal. And if he does, he might sell for a swing, hoping that we continue down. Or he might sell for a scalp. Betting that we're probably beginning a trading range here. A lot of the websites that talk about trading focus on trade selection, buy setups, sell setups. But in fact, that's not nearly as important as managing trades. The websites make it sound like there are perfect setups, secret setups that great traders have. And they're not going to tell anyone. And that's just not the case. Most of the time, 90% of the time, a good trader can make money at any instant buying or selling. If he uses a wide stop and is willing to scale in and he manages his trade correctly. Here we're getting a bear breakout below that low. Maybe you can sell that close. We have a pair of bear bars closing in their lows. And then maybe scalp out on the reversal up. We have a micro double bottom here. On the other hand, someone else could look at that same chart and say, Huh, a lot of trading range price action. I bet it's a limit order market. I bet if I buy with a limit order at that low and buy right here, exactly where that bear sold, I can make money. I'll buy more lower and scalp out when it gets back to my entry price. I buy more here and it gets back to my entry price. I get all break even on my first buy and with a profit on my lower buy. You can make money selling at that point, or you can make money buying at that point. And that's true for 90% of the bars on the chart. If you manage your trades correctly and are using wide stops and are comfortable scaling in during 90% of the bars on the chart, you can make money. 10% of the bars on the chart, the probability is high that the market is breaking out and will continue further. So if you see a strong breakout, it's better only to trade in the direction of breakout. So 90% of the bars, you can make money buying or selling, but management is the key. 10% of the bars on every chart are in a strong breakout, either up or down. And when the market is in a strong breakout, it's better only to trade in that direction. After three or four bars down here, it's better only to be looking for shorts. Only 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout. In general, that's an average. Obviously, sometimes the market could be just trending very strongly up or down, and it might be 20% of the bars. But in general, if you have a chart on the screen with a hundred bars on it or so, about 10% of the bars are in a strong breakout. 90% of the bars are not in a strong breakout. They're either in a channel like this or like this or in a trading range. And when that's the case, you can buy or sell and make money if you manage properly. By manage properly, I mean get out when the premise is no longer valid, use wide stops and be willing to scale in. In this video, I talked about personality traits of great traders. I talked about the importance of learning how to avoid doing stupid things. And very important, I talked about being comfortable with uncertainty because as a trader, there are no perfect setups. And during 90% of the bars on the chart, the probability of making money buying or selling is between 40% and 60%. And the key is management, not trade selection. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video has been about personality traits of successful traders. For free dosðelobaus at ten y期 har nemanalysen h乃? This video did not informantick of any of the speakers that are enlistemics. You did not to try to explore the current library methods when you can produce a young consumer.司긴 different attributes for templars as needed. Go to stop. Try your patience in vitriota. Now let's see how to use the best instructions. How to use a process of biological chemicals as needed? What type of research equipment activities do your job, basically? Byproducts, it's traditional mechanical pastā 005. Now let's get started because of course of that time.