 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video is on trade management and on taking profits. I'm going to be talking about management. And by management, I mean what you do after you enter a trade. I'm then going to talk about OPM, other people's money. That's a concept that you sometimes hear if you have an open profit. Oh, it's other people's money. And the implication is that you can trade it more recklessly because it's not really your money. But the truth is, once it's in your account, it is your money. Trade management. It's what you do after you enter the trade. Traders take trades for any reason, and they always have a goal, a profit target. And they always have a means of protecting themselves if the goal is not reached. For example, a protective stop. By managing a trade, I mean following your plan. If the price action is doing what you expect, you follow the plan. If the price action is doing something other than what you expect, you have to change your plan. And you always have to be willing and ready to exit even with a loss. If your premise is no longer valid, you have to get up. For example, we have a double top. We also have a small double bottom here. But we have a trading range with a double top. And we broke above it and we went sideways. Traders could buy above this full bar or above that inside bar. And they get long over here on this bar. You have to have a plan. Initially, you might plan to take profits at a measured move up. So the bottom of the trading range, the top of the trading range, and the profit target would be up there. However, what do you do when you get this? You have a strong reversal down, yet the market did not reach your target. Well, what you do is the market clearly has done something very bearish. And the odds now of the market reaching your target are much less. So just exit. You can either exit on the close of this bar or on the reversal up, betting that the market is going to be up there. Betting that there will be at least some kind of a second leg down. Here we've got a strong bear breakout, a rally to a lower high, and then we did get a second leg down. We have a pair of consecutive strong bear bars closing on their lows, totally reversing this final bull breakout. So the odds are we're going to go sideways to down. And the chance of the market reaching your target is considerably less. So it's better just to get out. I often talk about the trader's equation. The probability of success times the size of your intended reward has to be greater than the probability of losing times the possible loss, the distance to your stock. You want that to be positive. You need to protect your profits. You need to let them grow. However, you've got to take them before they disappear. As far as strict rules go, there are no strict rules. All you have to do is be logical. And anytime you do something that results in a positive trader's equation, you're doing something that mathematically makes sense. So you're doing something that's reasonable and acceptable. In other words, you can do it. We have a bull trend. We have a bull breakout and a pullback. You can call it a wedge bull flag. Three pushes down. One and then two and then a pause and then three. So it's a wedge bull flag around a 50% pullback. Traders will buy above this bar. It's a small bull bar. When you're not sure where or when you should take profits, always rely on the trader's equation. You can always take profits whenever your profit is two times your initial risk. In fact, the math is, I think, based upon actual risk, but you can use initial risk here. Initial risk if you're buying here. Are you going to put your stop below the bottom of the wedge bull flag? Probably not. We could easily drop another one or two small legs down and your premise of a bull trend is still valid. So your stop is probably below the bottom of this bull breakout, like maybe below these bars or maybe below that bar. You enter here, just above this bar. Your initial risk is below the bottom of the bull breakout. One times your initial risk is here and two times your initial risk is here. So if you buy here and put a stop here, the math is always good if you take full or partial profits here at two times initial risk. If you do this all the time, you will make money. Even if you only win 40% of the time, you will make money. The trend kept going up and every institution has a way of protecting its profits and it does not want the risk to be too far. So if you buy here and your initial stop is here and the market keeps rising, are you going to keep the stop down here? No, at some point the risk is too great and you have to reduce your position or you can try to reduce your risk. One way to reduce your risk is by tightening your stop. So you trail the stop, you move the stop up usually to the bottom of the most recent bull trend. Here we have a reasonably strong bull breakout. So this is a major higher low. And once the market is somewhere up in here, traders will say, okay, I don't want to risk all the way down here. My premise is a bull trend. We should be getting higher lows, higher highs. If it falls below a fairly major looking higher low, my premise is no longer valid. So when the market is here or anywhere up in here, a lot of traders will raise their stop to below the bottom of this major higher low. Now, let's say the market is up here and your stop is down here. That's a much bigger risk than when you bought here and your stop was here. When you bought here with the stop down here, you traded with a position size that was appropriate for this size stop. Now the market is up here and you're risking much more. You can say it's other people's money. Fine. I would not say that. I would say my risk is greater than what I want it to be. And can I move my stop up here? I think that would be a mistake. That's a minor higher low. The only other way you can control your risk is by reducing your position size. And when institutions reduce their position size, they're selling out of their lungs. So you have bullish institutions now selling. And what happens? You get a pullback. And if the institutions are reducing their position, they often wait five or 10 bars to see if the reversal down, the profit taking reversal down is the start of a bear trend. If it's not and the market stabilizes, then they'll buy again. You just arbitrarily reduce your position size. Oh, the market's going up. I'm going to reduce my position size. It's usually better to do it at some kind of support and resistance because a lot of institutions will take profits at support and resistance. This is a bull trend. Now, where's the support? Look for it. One way to look for it is look for a gap. We have a bar here, a close above it. And then the low of this bar is at or above that high. And then the same thing here. We have a breakout bar, a bigger bar, and then followed by a bear inside bar. The low of that bear inside bar is above the high of this bar. That's the breakout point this high. And the pullback is that low. And there's a gap. The trend started either here or here. A measured move up takes us here. And a lot of institutions will take partial profits here, especially when the trend is pretty strong. They'll often take profits at one times the initial risk. At this point, we got this pullback and it looks like we're forming a gap once we start up again. The stop is down here. One times risk is up here. When there's a high probability trade like this, when you're in a breakout, the probability is high that the market's going to go higher. Traders will often take profit at one times initial risk. You can also look at it as a leg one, leg two move. We got a breakout and then a small pullback. And then the market started up again. So we have a leg one, leg two measured move. And the profit taking, traders reducing their position size results in a pullback. Traders need to protect profits and they have to let their profits grow. And you can do that by using initial protective stop. You can use trailing stops. You can use break even stops. Here we get a reversal down from a lower high with a strong bear breakout and a follow through bar. And then another follow through bar and another. Somewhere in here, you have to decide the odds are the market's going to go down rather than up. The market's always in short. A lot of traders will sell the close of either this follow through bar or this one here. Where's the initial stop? Well, at the top of the initial leg down. This is the strong breakout that began here. You could put your stop up here, but most traders would consider this a major lower high. If the market gets above this high, the premise of a bear trend is no longer valid. The market would either be in a trading range or in a bull trend. So they'll put their stops above that high. We get another bear breakout here. And what do you do? Do you still keep your stop up there? Probably not. Traders might put their stop above here. This is the top of this leg down or they might simply put their stop above the top of this bear breakout. What happened here? We have a bear breakout and then a bull bar for the follow through bar. This might be a failed bear breakout and the strong trend up. We have a bear trend, a protracted trading range, and then a bear breakout. You could call this a lower low major trend reversal. So if you did get out above this bull bar and the bulls failed to get a strong bull breakout and this rally failed to get above this lower high or that lower high and the rally lacked consecutive big bull trend bars. So it looks more like either a bull leg in a trading range or a bear flag. You have to be thinking about getting short again. And you can call this a wedge. There are three or four pushes up here. There's a first leg up here and then a bear bar. First leg and then another pause here. Second leg, third push, fourth push. A lot of traders will sell the reversal down. I don't have it drawn in, but I could draw a line across the top of this bull channel and we broke above it and starting to reverse down. That's another good reason to short, especially since the market is still always in short. Once it starts down, traders will say, okay, maybe I'll put my stop above the top of this bar because it's not going to be a good point. But I'm going to say, okay, maybe the price is still in short. I'm going to say, okay, maybe I'll put my stop above the top of this bar because if it gets above that, maybe it's no longer a bear trend. Maybe it's a trading range. So they sell here, stop up here. That's their initial risk. Here's one times initial risk. Here's two times initial risk. Here's two times initial risk. Traders might plan on exiting at two times initial risk, especially since the past 50 bars are small and the range is small over the past 50 bars. And the target is going to be smaller than traders selling up here where the bars are big and the swing is big. Well, look what happened. It did not fall below two times initial risk and then started to turn up. And so it did not reach your scalper's profit. And what do you do? A lot of traders will say, well, you know, it's not, not great. It did not reach my target. It got very close to it. I'm looking for a scalp. I don't want to lose any money. Maybe I'll simply move my stop to break even. Mathematically, break even stops are stupid. There's no mathematical basis for using a break even stop. A lot of times I would simply buy back my short on the reversal up or I'd leave my stop above the top of the bare leg. But realistically, a lot of traders when they're scalping, if it doesn't go their way, they'll quickly just move their stop to break even instead of trying to move it exactly above the high of this small bar. A lot of times it's simply easier if you're using a price ladder, for example, you can see exactly where your entry price is. A lot of traders will quickly move their stop exactly to that price. If you did not exit on the reversal up, and if instead you moved your stop to break even, your stop did not get hit here. The market resumed down again. And a lot of traders would simply try to scalp out at that prior low. And you can see we fell below that prior low. It's around two times initial risk and they'll take profits there. They certainly will exit on the reversal up because this is not behaving like a bear trend anymore. We have a bear breakout here, but a very weak second leg down here. And it looks like we're starting to enter a tight trading range. OPM, other people's money. It's never true. Once the money is in your account, it's your money. I really think it's a pretty dumb concept. We have a bear breakout here. Big bar, closing below the low of the past 10 bars. Probably a measuring gap and probably fall from there. So let's say you sell that close, this close to this big bear bar right there. Where's your initial stop? Probably just above the top of the bear leg. You don't want it to get above this bar. If it does, your premise that we're at the start of a bear trend is probably wrong. The market fell and then went sideways. We have a double top bear flag, low one, low two. And we went up again here. You can call it a low three or a triangle. It does not matter. And then we reversed up here. We have a very good bull bar closing near its high. Okay. A very strong bull reversal bar. And we have a potential final flag. Can a beginner hold short thinking that all of this profit is somebody else's money? Can he hold short and say, I don't care if it comes back to my target. I'm not losing any money. That's other people's money. Some beginners will do that. They'll move their shop to break even, hoping that we'll just keep channeling down. No, you cannot do that. That's just totally dumb. Once the money is in your account, it's your money. And you have to protect it. And this is a strong buy signal. So you have to buy. You have to buy back your shorts. And if you're able to, you can go long. Think about this for a second. You're arguing that this is somebody else's money, even though it's in your account. Let's look at it from the other side. Let's say you bought here instead of sold and the market is falling. So now you're losing more and more money. The money is no longer in your account. Do you pretend that it is in your account, even though it's in somebody else's account? No, you no longer have any control over it. It's not your money. It's in somebody else's account. Likewise, if you sold here, there is money in your account that was not in there earlier. It's your money and you have to manage it like your money. It doesn't matter if you sold here or if you sold here or if you sold here, the management is the same. Management has nothing to do with entry price. It has to do with price action. And it doesn't matter where you sold anywhere in here. Once you see this bar, you have to get up. As I said, once you're in a losing position, that money is in somebody else's account. It's their money. Don't worry about it. It's no longer yours. You no longer have any control over it. I talked about this as a triangle. You can call it a double bottom. Let's say you bought above this bull bar. Three pushes down. We went down and up on this bar and then down on this bar and then up and then down. So you get three pushes down. We have a breakout and then a pullback with a good looking bull bar. So let's say you bought above this bull bar. It's a triangle. Arguably, it's a reasonable thing to do. And what do you do? What I would do is I would get stopped out with a loss because I think we're still always in short. So I don't want to be holding long if the buy signal reverses down below the bottom of the trading range. I would just get stopped out with a loss. If I lose, I don't look back and say, darn, I feel bad. I shouldn't have done that or I wish the market didn't do that to me. I wish they didn't take my money. I never look back. When I'm trading, I always look forward. I'm only interested in what hasn't happened yet. What has happened, it's over. It's history. I cannot change it. And if I'm looking back, I'm going to miss the next great trade. So if I'm at this point saying, darn, I just lost money and I just feel bad and I'm going to take a break from trading and then you miss this. You cannot do that. You have to not feel bad over a loss. You're going to lose. Everybody's going to lose. Even a great scalper is going to win 90% of the time. That means he's going to lose 10% of the time. And if he looks back at his losses and is dwelling on them, thinking about them, he's not going to be mentally prepared for the next trade. And sometimes it's a great trade like this, a strong final flag reversal with a great looking bull bar. That's a great trade. You got to take it. If you don't buy here, you're going to start buying closes somewhere up in here. And if all you're thinking about is, darn, I lost money, but you miss a great opportunity to make back many more times than what you lost. Take a look at this slide. Let's look at the bear side of it over here. There are many reasons to get short on the way down. You could sell this as a double top bear flag. Here we have an exceptionally big bear breakout. We have another one here. Here we have an attempt to reverse that is weak. So a lot of traders will sell at a limit order at the high of this bar, betting the bull reversal will fail. And then here you can call this a double top bear flag. You can call it a low one bear flag. Traders will sell there as well. It doesn't matter which one of these entries you took. Your stop is still going to be the same up here above the top of the bull leg. Some traders sold early on. Other traders sold late. It does not matter. All of those bears are going to manage their trade the same. And all of those traders have to get out above this bull reversal bar. This is a strong buy signal. So traders must exit. It does not matter if you shorted right here and you're thinking, oh my gosh, that's not enough profit. I don't want to get out. You're going to get out because that's what you have to do. The market is telling you that your premise of a bear trend is no longer viable. You always have to manage your trades based upon the current price action. All that matters is where's your stock? Where's your target? Is the premise still valid? And for all of these entries, you have to get out right here. Your stop is up here. You know, maybe after the spare breakout, you might lower your stock to here. But in any case, this is a good buy signal and you have to get out no matter if you sold here initially or if you sold up here. So entry price has nothing to do with trade management. All that matters is the stop location, the target and whether or not your premise is still valid. In this video, I talked about management, which is what you do after you enter a trade. I then talked about other people's money and it's a stupid concept that's never true. Anytime money is in your account, it's your money and you have to manage it like any other money that you own. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video is on trade management and taking profits.