 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of seven videos on breakouts. In this video, I'm going to talk about second leg traps. The market makes a leg, has a pullback, and then has a second leg. The second leg is especially strong, leading you to think that it's going to lead to a breakout, yet it reverses. I'm going to also talk about strong breakouts. I will discuss whether or not breakouts are likely to succeed or reverse. Even when something seems very clear, you always have to be ready for a surprise. Nothing in the market is 100%, and most things are only between 40% and 60% certain. So that means even when you think something is probably going to happen, there's at least a 40% chance the opposite will happen, or what you think will happen will not happen. For example, here we have a pretty good bull trend, and then a pullback that's not very strong. It lacks consecutive big trend bars closing on their lows. Also, it pulled back about 50% of the bull trend. So the odds are it's a bull flag, and it will be followed by a second leg up, in a test of the high, or certainly of the high close. Both bulls and bears expect a rally. The bulls got a breakout, a decent looking bull trend bar closing on its high, and closing above the high of the past 5 or 6 bars, so that is a sign of strength. And at this moment, there is a 60% chance that we're going to go at least a little bit higher. Yet, you always have to be prepared for a surprise. Here, we have a huge bear trend bar closing on its low, closing below the low of the prior bar, closing below the higher low, closing below the low of the past 20 bars. So that is a big surprise. Huge bear breakout, but you need follow through. And instead, look what the bulls did. They created a bull trend bar after a huge bear trend bar. And that generates confusion. Why were the bears unable to get a second consecutive bear trend bar? And why were they unable to close this bar below the low of the bull leg? So something is wrong with this bear breakout. We have a bear breakout and a pullback. So this is a low one sell signal bar. It did not get triggered. We have another pullback bar. And the follow through from this bear breakout came two bars later, not on the next bar. It's always better if you get immediate follow through and the second bar is a big bear bar closing on its low. It's usually a lower probability bet that the breakout will be successful if the bar after the big bear breakout is a bull bar. But sometimes you get the follow through bar two or even three bars later. Here we have a bear bar closing on its low. And it's a low one sell signal bar. The high of the bar stayed below the low of this higher low. So we have a gap. That also increases the chances that we're going at least a little bit lower. Now think about what just happened here. We have a huge bear bar closing on its low, surprising everyone. Whenever there's a surprise, bulls and bears both get trapped. Bears get trapped out. They thought the market was going up and a lot of bears did not sell here. They're hoping for any kind of a pullback that will let them sell at a higher price. Bulls also assume the market was going up. And as this bar started to form, they assumed it would form a double bottom here. Yet when it closed, it closed way down here. And the bulls at this point who did not get out during here are thinking, Oh my gosh, I'm in a losing position. I got to get out. And they're hoping for any kind of a pullback to get out with a smaller loss. So a lot of these bulls who bought anywhere in here, bought this breakout of a bull flag and did not exit here. Now have limit orders trying to get out. Maybe at a 50% pullback from the spare breakout. Maybe they'll sell above this bull bar. Maybe they'll sell below this bear bar. But these bulls are trapped into a losing trade. So bulls trapped in, bears trapped out. The market's probably going to go down for at least a small second leg. Maybe for a big bear trend. Here we did get a second leg down. Both bulls and bears sold below this pullback bar. So it's a low one short, first pullback. The bulls tried to reverse up again a second time from a micro double bottom. But are these two bull bars enough to reverse that bear bar? Probably not. So a lot of traders would not buy above this bull bar. And the bulls who did saw the entry bar is a small bear doji. They are unhappy and those bulls are going to get out. And the bears are happy that this is not a big bull bar. That it's a bear bar. So they're more confident that we're going lower. Some bears sold the low one. And other bears sold the low two. The low two bears have a good entry bar. Good follow through. Probably going at least a little bit lower. I want to talk a little bit about second leg traps. Here we're in the trading range. We're down. We're up. We're down. We're up. And even though the market's rallying here, big bull bar, doji. Big bull bar, doji. It's selling off here. We've got a couple bear bars and then bad follow through. Tails below bars. Tails above bars. This is trading range price action. So even though we're selling off, it's probably a bear leg in a trading range. Even though we're rallying, it's probably a bull leg in the trading range. And then you get this. What just happened here? We have a huge gold breakout at the start of a second leg up. Yet, it's not above the top of the trading range. You look to the left. We're a little bit above here, but what kind of follow through did we get? We have terrible follow through after the bull breakout above the top of the range. In trading ranges, there's often a very strong second leg. First leg up, pull back, second leg. Trapping traders into believing the breakout will be successful. Yet, it traps bulls into buying high. Here, we have a sell off. Not particularly strong. Lacking consecutive big bear trend bars. Bad follow through after bear bars. Big bear bars. Big bear bars. Big bear bars. Big bear bars. Big bear bars. We're a big bear. Big bear, even if we're not gonna make a big bear. But, there's also a second leg trap. That's pretty big of a big bear. There's also a big bear bear. Now, we have a big bear bear. trend bars, bad follow through after bear bars, big bear bar tail on the bottom. It looks like a leg in a trading range. And then we're accelerating downward. And here we have a pair of strong bear bars closing on their lows, not big tails. So this looks like the market is changing from trading range price action into breakout trend price action. However, whenever you have a breakout of a trading range, you always have to be suspicious that it could be a second leg trap. And that's what took place here. So first leg down, pull back. And now we're trying to accelerate into a trend. Yet it was a trap. It trapped traders into selling low. We have a micro double bottom, a good looking bull bar. And then we begin a leg up in the trading range. Here, strong leg up, second leg. First leg up, a leg in a trading range, a pull back, a bull flag. The bulls are hoping it's a bull flag. And this is the start of a bull trend. And then we have this very strong second leg up. And bulls are hopeful. They're hopeful that the breakout will succeed. And traders who do not understand what's going on, they'll buy. And then they'll hold long even after this big bear bar. Smart traders will say, ah, second leg trap trading range. I'm going to start selling low to the strong bear bar. Trading ranges, they constantly trap traders into buying high and selling low. You constantly get strong breakouts near the bottom that fail. Trap traders into selling low. Strong breakouts near the top that fail. And trap traders into buying high. And they reverse down. Usually, when they reverse down, you get a good sell signal bar. When you have a second leg trap at the bottom and they reverse up, you get a pretty good looking buy signal bar. And very often, a micro double bottom. It's very important always to look to the left. Bear breakout, look to the left. Wait a minute. There's a lot of trading range price action here. This might be a trap. Very strong bull breakout, look to the left. We only have one or two bars above this close. And then we got this reversal. This might be a second leg trap. We have a trading range. And most trading range breakouts fail. Whenever you get a breakout, a second leg that looks strong enough so that a third leg down is likely, yet you're in a trading range, you have to be ready for the possibility that the breakout will fail and the trading range will continue. No matter how strong the breakout is, whenever there's a trading range breakout and you get a breakout that looks like it's strong enough to be the start of a bull trend, at least get a second leg up. You have to be prepared that it's a trap forcing traders into buying high and then immediately reversing. If you see the breakout not having good follow-through buying and instead you get a bear bar closing on its low, this is probably a trap and we're probably going to get a couple legs down. One pullback, two. One pullback, two. I'm going to talk a little bit now about signs of strong breakouts. Things that make traders believe that a breakout will be successful. All right, be ready. These are signs that a bull breakout will be strong. My list is not complete, but the point I'm making is that there are lots of indications that a breakout will be successful. And the more of these things that are present in a breakout, the more likely the breakout will succeed. You can stop the slide here and you can read them. I'm not going to spend a lot of time on this slide because if I did, I would have to spend a lot of time on this slide. This is a list of signs that a breakout will be weak. It's pretty much the opposite of those on the prior slide. This is for a bull breakout. Here, a bear breakout. The more of these things that are present, the more likely the bear breakout will succeed. So these are signs of a strong bear breakout. And here is an opposite list. The more of these things that are present, the more likely the bear breakout is weak and it will fail and reverse. I just gave that long list of signs of strong and weak breakouts for both bull and bear trends. I'm now going to be talking about whether or not a breakout will succeed or whether it will reverse. Although it might be hard to believe, this is the single most important concept in trading. Will a breakout succeed or fail? The market is constantly probing. Is the price too low? Is the price too high? So it's constantly trying to break out. And the breakouts succeed. The breakouts fail. Here we broke out. We went down further. Here we tried to break out, but we reversed up. Here we broke to the upside, reversed down. The market's constantly probing to find the appropriate price. Where is the right price? What price is too high? What price is too low? This is the basis for everything that we do as traders. Do we want to enter the trade? Do we want to bet on an opposite trade? Where are we going to put our stop? If we got a breakout that failed to the downside and we reversed up strongly, our stop is going to be down here. Where are we going to take profits? Well, maybe we'll take profits near the top of the bear breakout. It's the basis of everything that we do as traders. We have a bear breakout. We got follow-through selling. We have another bear breakout. Big tails. And then we have a bull doji bar here. This is a triangle. Three pushes down. One, two, three. And we have a bear breakout. A triangle, late in a bear trend, usually becomes the final bear flag. And the breakout usually does not go very far before there's a reversal, at least back to the apex or middle of the triangle. Here we have a bear breakout. It failed. We reversed up in a series of bull bars or doji bars. The absence of bear bars. The failed bear breakout was followed by a successful bull breakout. Every bull closed. This close was at the close of this bar. This close above the close of this bar. Every close is at or above the close of the prior bar. A bull bar closing on its high. And then a pair of very big bull bars closing on their highs. This is where the bears finally gave up and traders decided that we're now in a successful breakout. I think it's important to realize that every trend eventually ends with some kind of a failed breakout. Remember, every trend bar is a breakout of something. And every trend fails sooner or later. And every tail is a failed breakout. The market tried to go one way. And it reversed before the bar finished. Here we have a bear breakout. Bear trend. A pullback. An attempt to reverse up. So it's a bear flag. And we broke out. We broke to a new low. But look at this. We reversed up. So the breakout to a new low failed. And now we have a double bottom. A slightly lower low double bottom. But a double bottom. This bull doji is probably not strong enough to reverse these two bear bars. This reversal is probably minor. And therefore, a leg and a bear flag or in a trading range. And the market probably will continue sideways to down. This bull bar. A trend bar. Every bull trend bar is a bull breakout. It's a breakout above this double bottom. Or at least above this buy signal bar at the double bottom. Another new low. Another breakout. And a big, big tail on the bottom. At one point when this bar was forming, it was a big bear trend bar. Big bear black bar. It looked like this. But when it closed, it was this. A small bull body. And it closed above the breakout point. So it was a breakout. But it failed. Whenever you see a failed breakout, you have to be thinking. Is the failure going to lead to an opposite trend, like this? Or is it simply going to lead to a pullback? A bull flag. And the trend will then resume. Here, we have a failed bull breakout. At one point, this was a bull bar. But it closed on its low. And now it's a bear bar. It's setting up the possibility of a reversal of this bull breakout. So this bull breakout is now failing. So bull breakout. A bear bar closing on its low. This could be the start of a bear trend. Here, we have a bull breakout with a tail on top. This bar traded below its low. The bears are trying to reverse the bull trend. They obviously did a bad job. But this pullback, this low going below that bar, is an attempt to reverse the bull trend. So at this moment, when this bar traded below that bar, it was a failed bull breakout. When this bar traded below the low of this bar, it was a failed bull breakout. So bull breakout, and then a reversal. Bull breakout, and then a reversal. These reversals, however, became bull flags. They led to trend resumption up. So reversal attempt, but it reversed into a minor reversal, a bull flag. Failed bull breakout, a reversal attempt. Again, minor reversal, became a small bull flag, and the bull trend continued higher. Look at this one up here. Take a look up here. Failed bull breakout. And this time, instead of leading to a bull flag, it tried to be a bull flag here. In fact, it led to a trend reversal. So here, we have failed bull breakouts creating bull flags. Here, we have a failed bull breakout creating a trend reversal. Traders are constantly trying to determine whether a breakout will succeed or reverse. Because if you can, you can create a trade with a mathematical advantage. You can create a trade with a favorable trader's equation. You have an edge. Think about this for a second. Bull bar closing on its high. Bull bar closing above its midpoint. Tail, yes, but still a bull bar. Same with this. Tail, yes, but a bull bar. We have three consecutive bull bars all closing above their midpoints. Two very big bars. This open is above the close of this bar. So as soon as this bar closed, traders hit buy the market. They didn't place a limit order. They just hit buy the market. This open is above the close of that bar. Again, a lot of urgency. Bulls are very eager to buy. Do you think this reversal is going to be a bull flag or a bear trend? Well, the first pullback after a strong bull breakout, high probability there'll be at least a small second leg up. If the breakout is strong enough, there's probably going to be a measured move up. Maybe from the open of the first bar of the breakout to the close of the final strong bar of the breakout and measured move up, which is what we got here. Since the probability is high that this failed breakout will fail, in other words, the attempt by the bears to reverse the market will fail and this will become a bull flag, traders will look to buy. They'll place a buy stop just above the high of this pullback bar or they may want to buy above a bull bar. So they may buy above the high of this bull bar and enter right there. Strong bull breakout, pullback. Breakout, pullback. Breakout. So a spike in channel, wedge. Breakout, pullback. Second push, pullback. Third push. Very common pattern. And it very often tests down to the bottom of the channel. So spike, pullback, channel. And traders look for a reversal down to test the bottom of the channel. And then usually it ends up in a trading range. In any case, if you're long, you probably will get out below this strong bear bar, given that it's a wedge top. And given that we're probably coming down here. And if you're not long, but you're a fairly aggressive bear, you'll sell on a stop right below the low of that bar. You'll sell the reversal down, hoping that will test down to the bottom of the bull channel. Now, clearly a strong bull breakout. As I said, opening above the close of the prior bar. Big bull bars closing on their highs. Consecutive bull bars two. Three consecutive bull bars. How do you get long during a strong breakout like this? Well, there are lots of ways to get long. Many traders will simply buy at the market. As the market's going up, they just hit the button buy. They just buy at the market. While other traders will wait for bars to close, and then they'll buy at the market. They'll wait for the close of a bull bar. They'll buy at the market. And they'll even buy the close of a strong bear bar, betting that the reversal will fail. A lot of traders are happy to buy the close of consecutive bear bars, as long as they're not too big. If these two bear bars are closing down here, they will not buy. But if the bear bars are small compared to the bull bars, they'll buy. Because a lot of times, traders will think, huh, it probably has to have three or four consecutive bear bars to really reverse this strong bull breakout. And therefore, if it has two, it does not have three. It probably will not get three. Therefore, I'll buy the close of two, betting that it'll not get three. So traders will buy the close of bull bars and the close of bear bars. They'll both buy below bars and above bars. They'll buy below bars, betting that the reversal attempt will fail, so that the bears who sell below that bar will lose money. Bulls buy that. They'll buy exactly what the bears are selling, betting that the bears will lose. And then they'll buy above a bar because they believe the bears who did sell will give up. The bears will say, uh-oh, I made a bad trade. I got to buy back my shorts. So they'll buy above the high of the prior bar. Others will buy above the high of a bull bar. Some will simply buy simply because it's a bull flag. It's a minor reversal down. So some traders buy the reversal up, betting that the reversal down is simply creating a bull flag. They're buying pullbacks or reversals up from pullbacks. Whenever you see a strong bull breakout, you have to be ready for a bull flag, and you have to be ready for the bull flag to break to the upside. You place a buy stop just above the high of the prior bar, hoping that if the market resumes up, you'll place a buy stop at the high of the prior bar. When this bar closed, you had bulls placing a buy stop above its high in case the market went straight up. Then we have a pullback bar, low below the low of the prior bar. Bulls now lowered their stop from above this bar to above this bar, and they got filled over here. So you have to be prepared for the resumption of the trend back up. Strong bear trend. We have a bull breakout, but two bear bars. Just three bear bars closed below the low of the past seven or eight bars. The bear bar getting bigger. In a bear trend, different ways to get in. One is simply sell at the market. At some point, as this bar is falling, you have to conclude the bulls are trapped. They have to get out. This bar is falling very fast, and it's because we fell below the bottom of this bull breakout, and a lot of the bulls are deciding that they're on the wrong side of the market. And the bears see that as well. They assume that maybe we'll fall for a measured move down based upon the height of this bull breakout. That would be somewhere down here. They know we're going lower, so a lot of traders, if they're quick to understand what's going on, that this is a reversal, a failed bull breakout, they'll simply hit the button, sell at the market. Other traders prefer to sell the closes of bars. They'll sell the close of a bear bar, betting that we're going lower. And whenever they see a bull bar closing near its high, they'll sell that as well, betting that the bull reversal attempt will fail, become a bear flag, and lead to a trend down. These bull bars, we have three bull bars here, but the bull bars are not big, certainly not big relative to this. The bears will sell the bull closes, betting that this is a minor reversal, and that the bear trend will resume down. Traders will also sell above the high of the prior bar, and they'll sell below bars, betting that if the market falls below the low of the prior bar, the bear trend probably is starting to reverse down. Bear flag, so they place a stop to go short just below the low of the prior bar, betting that the breakout of the bear flag will be a resumption of the bear trend. Bear flag, it's a bull channel, and we're breaking below the bottom of that bull channel, bear flag, and the bears bet that the trend will resume down. Weak rally, minor reversal, probable bear flag, worst case, probably a trading range. If a rally looks weak, you have to assume it's a bear flag, and traders have to be prepared to go short. When this bar closed, traders placed a stop order to go short below its low, not filled. When this bar closed, traders placed a stop order to go short just below its low, not filled. And the same with this bar, this bar, and this bar. And here, they did get filled, finally. But that's traders who are prepared to go short. You have to be thinking about it, and you have to be placing your orders. You have to be ready to catch the trade. In this video, I talked about the second leg traps, where the market makes one leg, pulls back, and then has an even stronger second leg. But the second leg leads to a reversal instead of a measured move. It traps traders into buying high if it's a strong second leg up. It also traps traders into selling low if it's a strong second leg down. Second leg traps are common in broad channels, and especially common in trading ranges. I also talked about signs of strong breakouts. I then talked about characteristics of breakouts that lead traders to believe the breakout will be successful or that it will reverse. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fourth of seven videos on breakouts.ability servicebook. What are your thoughts onkits? This is the first thing I do. If you want to check your actions, which means you will be successful on the news?