 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability. I would like to begin by talking a little bit about the z-score, which is a mathematical way to measure how profitable a strategy is. And then I want to talk a little bit about probability of the three variables that a trader needs to understand when structuring a trade, risk, reward, and probability. Probability is the most important. A z-score, it's a measure of how good your system is. It's used by quantitative analysts, quants, when they design systems. As a trader, you do not need to know anything about your z-score, but if you want some better mathematical understanding of how good your method of trading is, the z-score is one measure that you can use. It's basically the number of standard deviations from a mean. This is the formula, and most of you are not going to be interested in the mathematics of it. N, the total number of trades in the series that you're examining. R, the total number of winning or losing streaks in the series. For example, if you have two consecutive winners, that's a winning streak. If you have seven consecutive losers, that's a losing streak. It doesn't matter how many are in the streak, it's just the number of streaks. And then W, the total number of winning trades. And L, the total number of losing trades. A z-score measures just how reliable your system is. Can you trust your system going forward? If you have a high z-score, then you have a much better chance of making money going forward. If you have a low z-score, you have a much higher risk of losing your money and losing your account. I want to show you this chart, and I want to show you a good way to trade it and a bad way to trade it. For example, let's say you begin by scalping for a reward that is one times your risk on second-inch reversals. For example, you buy a high two bull flag or you sell a low two bear flag. Here are some sample entries. Here's the first entry, there's the second entry, so you sell on the second entry. Here's the first entry, here's the second entry, so you buy on the second entry. Again, first, second, a high two bull flag. High one, high two, a second entry buy. A pullback, high one, high two. This is the high two here, so you get long there. And then again, high one, high two. On the way down, we have a double top, second entry short, a low two bear flag, second entry. A low one on this bar, low two on that bar, all the way down. Here, we have a high one, high two for the reversal up. Now, this system has a very high Z score because it has a high winning percentage. Eleven of the twelve trades on this chart are winners, and all the winners are about the same size. Both of those things indicate that you have a very consistent way of trading, and therefore, a much better chance of making a profit going forward. The past results are a good predictor of what you'll expect to see in the future. In other words, what you're doing is good. You can miss some trades, but you're confident that you still can make money. Every now and then, you'll hear traders talk about a blown account, or ruin, risk of ruin. How much risk do you have of blowing your account? A blown account simply means that your account no longer has enough equity to meet margin requirements. Your broker will not let you trade unless you put more money in your account. It can mean that you lost all the money in your account, and it can mean that you lost so much money that you lost more money than is in the account, and you have to send your broker even more money. However, the minimum that you need for your account to be ruined or blown is for the equity to have fallen so low that your broker will no longer let you trade unless you put more money in your account. When you have a high Z-score, the risk of blowing up your account is small, and therefore you can risk more per trade. A best Z-score would be about 5, which is extremely rare, but outstanding scalpers can get a score that high. A really good Z-score is 2 to 3. In general, if you have a very good system, a very good Z-score, you can risk about 2% of your account on every trade that you take. The lower your Z-score, the smaller percentage of your account you should risk on a trade. Here's another system using the same chart. Instead of buying second entry reversals or high 2 bull flags and selling low 2 bear flags, let's say instead you bought at the high of the prior 10 bars, and you reversed the short below the low of the past 10 bars. Broke to the low of the past 10 bars, you sold, and then you reversed along at the high of the next 10 bars, and you lost money, obviously. We have a new low, so you sell here. Another loss. A new high over the past 10 bars, you buy. You have a small win because this is where you exit below the low of the past 10 bars. And then look at this. You have a very big win, and it probably offset most or all of the prior losses. And therefore, the strategy is a profitable strategy. However, it's a bad approach to trading because it has a very low Z-score. It has a very low winning percentage. You only had one significant win, and almost all of the profit, in fact, pretty much all of the profit, came from a single trade. And that's dangerous. Let's say this is a five minute chart, and you had to go to a doctor's appointment right here. Then you would have taken one, two, three, four trades so far today, and you would have missed this trade. Let's say it's a daily chart. And let's say you're taking all these trades, and you're losing, losing, losing, and you're hoping for this big win. And let's say you went on vacation right here for two weeks, and then you missed the big win. That's a big, big problem if you have a system where most of your profit comes from a single win. There's a much higher risk of blowing your account. Any system that needs one big win to make the system profitable is a bad system. There are many broker's firms that allow you to design and test systems. A very important part when you analyze the results of your system is to pay attention to whether or not most of the profit comes from a single trade or two or three trades. If you need one or two big trades for the system to be profitable, it's a bad system, and you should not trade it. Even though when you look at the results, it'll say that you made money in the system. You may even have made a lot of money in the system. But if it all comes from a single trade, your risk of ruin is very high. And you probably will eventually lose your account if you continue to trade this system, because you will miss too many of the big trades that you need to offset all the prior losses. If you miss this one big trade in this series of trades, your system loses money. Another problem with a system where all the profit comes from a single trade is it's hard to wait through bar after bar after bar and loss after loss after loss, hoping for the one big trade. It's hard to take the next trade. You'll look back and say, gosh, I've been losing a lot. Maybe I better slow down in my trading. And you'll end up missing the one great trade that you need to reverse all of the losses and to make the system profitable. A low Z-score means that the chance of blowing up your account is great and your system is bad. You have a low winning percentage. In other words, most trades are losers. You have a few big winners, but more big losing trades. And you're too dependent upon one or two outstanding trades to offset all of the losses and make the system profitable. Not only do you have to take the trade, you have to manage it correctly. And that's hard to do as well. The result is if you analyze the standard deviation of your trading results, the standard deviation is very big. You have some very small trades, some very big trades, and that is a very dangerous system. It's unreliable. If you do try trading a system like this, you should trade very, very small. Most traders should never trade a system where you need one or two big trades to offset a lot of losses because you're going to lose money. You're going to lose money. The odds are just overwhelming that you're going to lose. Any system that a beginner trades, you should trade small because that will reduce the chances of him losing his account. In general, if a beginner can trade small enough to risk 1% of his account on each trade, that is a good starting point. For example, if you have a $10,000 account, try to risk $100 or so on each trade and not more or not much more. When you're starting out, you're always going to lose. But if you can trade small enough, the cost of learning is not so bad. Even if you have a great system starting out, which you probably will not have, you're still going to lose because you probably will not manage the trades correctly. I mentioned that if you have a $10,000 account and you want to risk about 1% for a trade, you would be risking about $100, which is a stop of about 2 points in the E-mini. Even if you have a $10,000 account and your broker might allow you to trade 3 or 4 E-mini contracts, that would generate too much risk. And therefore, you should be trading only one contract. In general, traders should trade the I don't care size. They should trade so small that they don't care if they lose. All they care about is, am I doing the right thing? Am I trading correctly? Am I managing my trade correctly? Are my setups and entries and exits all logical? And that allows you to practice doing the right thing without worrying about money. You cannot get rich trading the I don't care size. However, you can learn how to trade very well with minimum cost. Even when you become a consistently profitable trader, it's better to be trading the I don't care size. size because you want to be doing this for a career. I've been doing this for 30 years and you have to be happy and you have to be comfortable and it's not fun to be worried all the time. If you have a $10,000 account and you're a Forex trader and you want to risk no more than $100 in the euro versus the dollar, then you can use a 100 pip stock and you can trade 10,000 units. That would keep you under the $100 risk. Instead, you could use a 20 pip stop and trade 50,000 units. Or even better, begin trading only 10,000 units so that your risk is only $20 per trade. That's one of the great advantages of the Forex market. Most brokers will allow you to trade very small sizes, which reduces your risk per trade and your cost of learning is therefore much less. And it's easier to trade a size where you really don't care or you care so little that you're able to do what you need to do and develop a track record, a style of trading that you trust. And once you're at that point where you can consistently make money, even if it's a small amount of money, then you can begin to increase your position size. Of these two choices, trading with a 100 pip stop or a 20 pip stop, both are good. They're both good, I don't care sizes. And they allow you to practice doing the right thing without worrying about money. I've talked many times about the three variables that traders have to consider, risk, reward, and probability. You can look at it as two variables. You can say risk reward ratio, one variable, and probability, the other variable. Probability is the most important because it's the one that is the hardest to know with any certainty. You always know what your risk is. It's the distance to your stock. You also always know what your reward is. It's the distance to your minimum profit target. Probability is much more difficult. Probability, I think, is the main reason why it's so hard for beginners to make money. That lack of certainty confuses traders and it scares traders and they end up making a lot of mistakes. For example, a trader watches a breakout and they watch an additional breakout and now they see a bull bar closing on its high and they think, wow, I've seen enough proof that the market's going up. Maybe I'll finally buy here. That's a common beginner mistake. We're starting to get dojis and bear bars. We have a big tail on top of this bar. This is a tight trading range and the big bull bar is forcing you to buy at the top of a tight trading range after three legs up on a bull. One or one and then two, three. Strong breakout. You expect at least one more leg up. However, this big tail and then these two bear bars, it increases the chances that we're not going to get much more than one leg up. Beginners thought this was a high probability buy when, in fact, it was a low probability buy and the bull trend was probably transitioning into a trading range. Experts were selling here and they would have sold here as well, expecting that the market is no longer in a bull trend. It's in the early stages of a trading range. The trading range bottom could have been here, but it could be all the way down here at the bottom of the bull trend, which it turned out to be. We got a reversal spike pullback channel. Beginners tend to buy too late. Sometimes they buy too early. For example, they might buy here, thinking a double bottom, sell climax and double bottom with this or with that. They buy too early, they buy too late. Both are causes of losses. Another problem with probability is beginners often miss really great trades because they're afraid to risk too much. Here we have a series of bear bars, maybe 10 bars down without a bull body. We have a big bear breakout and a second bear bar closing near as low. This is a high probability short if you sell the close of this bar that you're going to make some money. You could have gotten out here and made a little bit, or you could have held all the way down here and gotten out down here. This is a high probability trade, but a lot of traders starting out will not take it because they know their stop is up here and they're afraid of risking that much money from selling here all the way up here. Even when they have a high probability trade, they're afraid to take the trade because of risk. When a beginner finally does sell, let's say he sells below this low one bear flag, he'll end up exiting too early for a loss or break even. He sells here and he sees a decent bull reversal bar here, a double bottom, maybe a big double bottom, and he buys, and he exits on the reversal up. If you're selling this late in a bear trend, you have to be swing trading, which means you need to use a swing stop at least above the sell climax, probably above the top of the bear trend, and you have to be willing to hold through pullbacks. This is almost certainly going to be a minor reversal. You have a tight bear channel lasting 10 or 15 bars, the first reversal up, bears will sell it. And bulls who have been buying all the way down and losing are going to use any bounce to exit. So you'll have bulls selling and bears selling, and you'll probably get at least a second leg down. The bears finally got their pullback. A low two short, low one, low two. You can call it a failed breakout above the double top, first high, second high, breakout that reverse down, and therefore it's a type of a wedge bear flag. But the beginner still does not sell. He's concerned that we're getting too many bull bars. He ignores the reality that the bull bars are small. There is no series of two or three big bull bars. Look at the size of these bull bars. They're big, but not compared to that, this, and that, and not compared to the size of the sell off. This is almost certainly a bull leg in either a trading range, or it's a bear flag leaning to another leg down. But the beginners won't take the short because they're afraid it's a reversal. It's not. Computers don't trade on emotion, and you can only make money if you follow their logic. When I say they don't trade on emotion, there are some algorithms that look for certain words in Twitter or news feeds, which is a measurement of emotion. But in general, the vast majority of trades taking place are not based upon any emotion. I think this is a very important point. On any chart, any time frame, any market, 90% or more of the bars on any chart are either in a trading range or a broad channel. That means that you can buy or sell at any point and make money if you manage your trade correctly. It usually means using a wide stop and scaling in, but it's possible. 10% of the bars on any chart are either in a strong breakout, like here, or in a relatively tight channel, like there. And a tight channel is a breakout on a higher time frame chart. When that's the case, you should only sell. So 10% of the bars in any chart are in a strong breakout, like this, or in a tight channel, and you should only be selling. Certainly a strong breakout, 10% of the bars on the chart are in a strong breakout, you can only sell. Here, theoretically, you might be able to make money. Obviously, the market did not reverse up high enough for buyers to make money. And again, if the market's in a fairly tight channel like that, it's a breakout on a higher time frame chart. And I think traders should only sell. When did it begin a strong breakout? Once you have three or four consecutive bear bars closing on their lows after some kind of credible reversal, you should assume the market's always in short. Beginners usually lose until they can get free of emotions. It's very difficult to win until you're comfortable with constant uncertainty. And 90% of the bars on the chart, you are going to be certain. 10% of the bars on the chart, you look at it and say, Oh, yeah, 60, 70, 80% were going lower. But the rest of the time, 90% of the bars on the chart, you're never more certain than 60%, which means the traders taking the opposite side of a trade are never less certain than 40%. That means that 10% of the bars on the chart, the probability of the direction is 60% or higher. 90% of the bars on the chart, the probability of the direction up or down is going to be between 40 and 60%. Every now and then, if you're watching traders on television, they'll talk about what's the direction of the next 100 points, the next 100 pips, the next 100 ticks, or next 10 pips, the next 50 pips. In other words, is the market going to go up 100 ticks before it goes down 100 ticks? Should I buy for 100 tick move up and risk 100 ticks to the downside? Or should I sell for 100 tick move down and risk to 100 ticks to the upside? I refer to that as the probability of an equidistant opposite move. Equidistant because it's X units one way before X units the other way. 100 pips up, 100 pips down. 1% up, 1% down. $1 up, $1 down. For example, at this moment, you don't see all this stuff yet, but at this moment, is it more likely that the market's going to go above that bar? You know the distance. If you sell here, your stop is above that bar. The distance to that line is the same distance here. So at this moment, if you had to buy and put a stop that distance below, looking for a test of that high, or sell, putting a stop up there and hoping for a reward equal to the size of your risk, what would you do? Would you take the buy or take your sell? Well, we're always in short. Once we've had this third consecutive bear bar, always in short. Always in short means it's probably going down. And therefore, the probability is greater that you're going to reach a measured move down from the high to your entry than it is that it'll get to your target. The stop for the bears is up here. Their reward is here. If someone buys here, they're looking for a new high. Their reward is here. And a reasonable stop would be an equidistant move down. So their stop is here. This is the risk for the bears and the reward for the bulls. This is the reward for the bears and the risk for the bulls. I think on the close of this bar, the market reversed always in short. In other words, the probability of making money shifted in favor of the bears. And at this point, if you were forced to buy or sell, you have a much better chance of making money if you chose to sell and putting a stop up there. Once it's always in short, it's easier to make money selling. For example, here we're always in long. It's easier to make money buying. At this instant, would you make more money putting a stop down here, going for a profit equal to the height from your entry price to the stop? Or would you make more money selling here, putting a stop that distance above, expecting the market to fall below the bottom of the breakout? It's more likely that we're going up. Here, the market's always in long. Here, the market's always in short. It's probably going to go here before it hits that stop. I talked about equidistant targets. Now, what about the probability of different size opposite moves? For example, moving X units one way before moving Y units the other way. For example, a computer might estimate the probability of the market going up 0.1% before it goes down 0.13%. Computers obviously want to maximize their profit. When the probability of an equidistant move favors the bears, the system designers are going to try to determine what the best profit target is. It might be better than simply one times risk. A bear is selling here. Here's his risk. This is the same distance, so this is one times risk. However, that is not necessarily the best target. The market may fall quite a bit more, especially once you start to see another breakout and another follow-through bar. Computers can make these calculations quickly, objectively, unemotionally, and it's too complex for traders to do. I would not worry about the perfect math. Good math is good enough. As long as you do something that makes sense, it does not have to be perfect. And when you're trading, you cannot focus too much on the math, trying to get every little penny that you can out of the market. It's better to just do something that makes sense and then concentrate on managing the trade properly. Keep asking yourself, is my premise still valid? Is my trade still good? If it's not, then you get out. If it is, you continue to hold your position and you think about moving your stop, tightening your stop, and adjusting your profit target, making it bigger, making it smaller, depending on what you're seeing. Some algorithms are designed to take more profit when the probability is high. Instead of just trying to take profit at one times risk, it does not matter what you do as long as what you do results in a positive trader's equation. In general, one times risk is the minimum that you want on any trade, but it's rarely the best. Usually, you can get more. This would be a better zone for taking profits. And it could be two times risk. It could be three times risk. I said before that probability and risk reward is a trade-off. If you're waiting to enter when the probability is high, the risk reward ratio is going to be worse. On the other hand, if you want trades that have very big profit potential, the probability is going to be less. A high probability trade always comes with a bad risk reward ratio, because there always has to be a reason for someone to take the other side of the trade. For example, if you're buying and you have a very high probability of winning on your particular trade, the institution taking the other side has a very low probability of winning. There has to be a reason for him to take the trade. And it's going to be he has a very strong risk reward ratio, and you have to have a very bad risk reward ratio. Sometimes you can structure a trade with a probability of 80% or more. However, that always means your risk is going to be small compared to your reward and that you're scalping. Most traders cannot make a living doing that. But I've known many extremely good scalpers over the years who do extremely well doing that. It's just very difficult for most traders to do it. And remember, it's not simply that you can do it. You have to be happy doing it. And there are very few people who can both be profitable and happy as scalpers. We have a strong bear breakout, good sized bear bars closing on their lows. It's a sell climax, probably a pullback soon. However, when a breakout is this strong, almost certainly you're going to get at least a small second leg down. This could be the second leg down. This whole thing probably was the second leg down. Let's say you sell the reversal up expecting that it's a minor reversal and a bad buy. It is. Look how many bear bars. And the only bull bar we have, it has a very tiny bull body. This has a very high probability of failing and becoming a bear flag. If a trader sells above this bull bar, betting that the bull reversal is going to fail, his stop at a minimum is at the top of the sell climax, just above the top of the sell climax. He could also put a stop up here if he wants. Both are okay, but this is an acceptable location for a stop. And let's say he exited right here on the test of this low on this big bear close. The math on that is actually decent. Your actual risk was small. Your reward is at least twice as big as your risk. And you ended up with a small profit, a scout. The initial risk was about three times the size of the reward. He sold at this high, got filled here, and this is where he took his profits. The risk, the initial risk was three times the size of his reward. If a trader takes this trade consistently, he has to win 80% of the time just to break even. Do you think it's an 80% bet selling the high of this bar? So if you see this trade set up 10 more times, you take it and expect to win 80% of the time. You probably will manage the trade incorrectly. You'll probably diagnose the setup incorrectly, selling trades that are actually going to be good reversals and not minor reversals. It's too easy to lose money. You have to win a very high percentage of the time, which means you have to do a lot of things right. You have to analyze whether or not the trade is acceptable. You have to decide if the premise is still reasonable. You sell this high and then fill it on this bar. And once the bar closes, you look at that and say, I don't know, I was hoping for a big bear bar on this bar when I entered and I did not get it. Should I continue to hold? Just too many decisions to make and it's very hard to do all of them well. To be a profitable scalper, you have to do all of them well because you need a very high winning percentage to make a consistent living, a good living as a scalper. And therefore traders should not be doing this. I'm looking at charts all day long and at every tick, every pip, if it's a Forex chart, I see obvious support or resistance or both. If I'm looking at any point on the chart, let's say this point in the chart, I can see where support and resistance is. Resistance is going to be where I'm going to put my stop somewhere above and support is going to be an area where I'll look to take profits. High probability of making money if I sell here and I manage my trade correctly. High probability that I can make as much money as I have to risk. In general, if you see a strong breakout like that, you know you're probably going to make money. A 60% chance you're going to make a reward equal to the size of the breakout. Either the high or open of this bar to your entry price here. 60% chance in general it's going to fall at least that same distance. So let's say you put your stop right above here. And let's say it's 15 ticks if it's a e-mini chart or a stock chart, or if it's a Forex market, let's say it's 22 pips. Measured move down is here. And if it's the e-mini or stock, you would get your 15 ticks before your stop was hit. If it was the Forex market, it would have fallen 22 pips and you would have received 22 pips profit while risking 22 pips initially. 60% chance when you took that trade that the market would reach a target equal to your risk. Reward equal to your risk. Whenever I'm looking at a chart and I'm trying to assess probability, the only time I'm confident of the probability is during a strong breakout when the context is good. When I see this strong breakout in a bear trend like this, I'm very confident that we're going to go lower. Probably a measured move down based on the close of this bar to the open of this bar. And when I say very confident, that means I believe the probability is at least 60% that it's going to fall to a measured move down before it gets to the stop above. Anytime I say, oh yeah, it's probably going down, I have to be 60% certain or more. If I'm less than 60%, I usually will not say, oh, it's likely to happen or it's probably going to happen. I might say, oh, it's maybe a little bit more likely than not, but it's not all that clear. However, if I look at something and I say, yeah, I'm pretty confident that it's going down. I assume the probability is 60% or greater. If you plug the data into the trader's equation, a reward equal to risk and a probability of 60%, that gives you a positive trader's equation. And that means that if you take any trade and you look at it and you say, oh, it's probably going down, you can go for a reward equal to your initial risk. And it's a mathematically good way to trade. High probability, you don't need a fantastic risk reward ratio. All you need is a reward equal to your risk to have a positive trader's equation. High probability, you don't need a bad trader's equation. When the market's in a strong bear trend like this, you can sell for any reason. You can sell bear closes all the way down. You can sell bull closes, betting that the first reversals up will fail. You can sell strong bull bars and a series of bars as long as you think the reversal up is still only a bull leg in a trading range or a bear flag, which this is. And you can sell below bars. You can sell below this bar and get filled here below this bar, get filled here. Use the correct stop, either here or here. You can sell with limit orders, a 50% pullback from this breakout. From this high to that low, 50% pullback, you can sell with a limit order right there. You can sell the limit order above this bar. You can sell with a limit order above this bar. Here's a small double bottom. And you can bet that the breakout above the double bottom will not get very far. So you can place a limit order to sell at this high and you get filled right there. It doesn't matter what reason you use to sell. You next have to analyze where is a logical place for the stock. The top of the sell climax, the top of the spare breakout is a good place. You could also put a stop up there. And you know how far your entry price is. If I sold here or if I sold here, I can figure out how many ticks or how many pips I'm risking. And then I should set my target, my profit taking target at that same number of ticks or pips, knowing that I'm looking at this and I'm saying, yeah, it's probably going down. That tells me that I'm at least 60% certain that it's going to go down for a move equal to my risk. And therefore, I have a good location for taking profits. We're in a bear trend. We have a wedge bear flag here. Low one, low two, low three. And now we have either a low one or you can call it a double top bear flag with this high and that high. Most double tops are not at the same level. And let's say you wanted to sell below a bear bar. So you sell right here. Where should you put your stop? In general, above the top of the most recent major lower high. Is this a major lower high? No, a major lower high has a strong breakout and usually a new low. This is, I think, a major lower high. This is clearly a major high. This is a reasonable place for a stop, but most traders selling down here probably would want a tighter stop, for example, above the top of this most recent bear breakout. High probability that the market's going to go down and your stop is here. Let's say your stop is 13 ticks above the entry price. If it's a stock or the E-mini. On the other hand, let's say it's a forex market and it's 18 pips above. It doesn't matter. Whatever that distance is, you're looking at a high probability trade and therefore, you can go for a profit target that is equal to your risk. Here's a measured move down from the stop to the entry price. This is the measured move down. If it was a stock, I said this could be 13 ticks, then your target is 13 ticks. If it's a forex market and this was 18 pips above your entry price, then your target is 18 pips below. You look at this and you know the market's in a bear trend. 60% certain it's going to go down at least as far as your risk. Therefore, selling below the spare bar, getting filled here, putting a stop here, a reasonable stop, has a 60% chance of reaching this profit target. I talked about a z-score, which is a mathematical way to measure how good your system is. In general, if you're testing a system and almost all of the profit comes from one or two trades, that is a bad system. You want a high winning percentage and you want rewards that are fairly consistent. You don't want all of your profit to come from one or two trades because the risk of blowing your account, ruining your account, being unable to trade without putting more money in the account then becomes high. All traders are always choosing between a trade with high probability or a trade with strong risk reward. You simply decide which is more important to you. Of the variables probability, risk and reward, risk and reward are always known. You know where your stop is. You know where you want to take profits. Probability is not always known. However, 10% of the bars on the chart, the probability is 60% or higher. For example, a strong breakout. 90% of the bars on the chart, the probability for a bull or for a bear is going to be between 40 and 60%. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability. of the They're highlighting video. I'm Al Brooks. This is the third of my videos.