 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on support and resistance. I'll begin by talking about how the closes in a buy the close bull trend often are resistance and how the closes in sell the close bear trends often are support. I'll then talk about breakout tests. The market often breaks out and comes back to test the breakout point and that breakout point therefore is a magnet. And in a bull trend, it's support. In a bear trend, it's resistance. Strong bull trend, micro channel beginning here, bull bar, bull bar, bull bar. At some point you have to decide the market's going higher and you begin to buy closes. For example, you buy this close, this close, you know, any of these closes, no bear bars. Even the first bear bar, you'll buy that close. The strong bull trends, I call it a buy the close bull trend because strong bulls are buying as soon as the bar closes. They're betting that the market is going to go higher even if there's a pullback first. Three consecutive bull bars, traders will buy the close, buy the close, buy the close. They'll also buy the first bear close. They'll also buy below bars. They'll also buy above bars. But I'm talking specifically here about buy the close. At some point you get a break below the bull trend line. And some trader bought this close or that close. So they bought the highest close in a bull trend. And that is important. The first reversal down in a strong bull trend, probably minor. The market then is either in a trading range or a bull flag, not a bear trend. So traders buying this close are confident the market will get back here at some point. And many will look to buy more lower down, like above a bull bar, betting that the market will come back to that close. Bulls disappointed by this, the size of the sell-off. They conclude it's no longer a strong bull trend. They add to their position. They scale in. They think it's probably a trading range or a bull flag. Trading range, you want to buy low, like above a bull bar on a reversal up. The bulls have bought here, bought believing it was a strong bull trend, but confident the first reversal down would be minor and that the market would test back up again. After they see this, they conclude the bull trend is over and it's now in a trading range. And if it's in a trading range, they're going to trade it like a trading range. They want to buy low and they want to sell high. Many of these bulls who bought this close and bought more here, want the market to come back to their original entry price and then they'll sell. They'll sell out and get out break even on their first buy and with a profit on their second buy. They're buying low, they're selling high to sell out of their loans to take profits and they're taking a small profit. So they're scalping. They believe the market's probably in a trading range. Because these bulls have bought this close and added on here are trying to sell here. You have bulls selling. That increases the chances that the market will reverse down. It also obviously increases the chances that the market will not continue up. The high close, therefore, is resistance. Strong sell-off. No longer a strong bull trend. Once it gets back up here, these bulls will be made whole again. The ones that scaled in will make a profit. The ones who did not scale in will conclude the market is no longer a strong bull trend. They'll stop trading it like a strong bull trend and they'll exit out of their longs, break even on their original entry. Because you have bulls selling there and you always have bears selling for any reason, chances are the market will try to turn down there or at least stop going up. And therefore, it's resistance. It took a lot of bars to get there. But what happened once the market got back to that prior high close? The bulls sold. The bulls who bought here sold, getting out break even. The bulls who bought here sold to get a scalping profit, betting that it's a trading range. They want to buy low. They want to sell high. And they want to scalp. The bears want to sell here as well because they know the bulls are disappointed by what took place. And therefore, the bulls will be taking profits up there or selling up there. And the bears sell up there as well. Bulls have limit orders to sell the high close. They'll get out either on the limit order at the high close or on a reversal down, especially below a bear bar. So they get out here, maybe with a small loss. They'll get out there. Whenever the bulls sell, it creates resistance. The bears want to sell at resistance. The bears sell there as well. They'll sell at the high close. And they'll sell on the reversal down. Strong bear trend. A lot of bears, as soon as they see a bear bar, they'll sell. Look at the close of this bar and look at the open of this bar. This open is below that close. That tells you that as soon as this bar closed, a lot of bears hit the button to sell the close. And the next bar opens slightly below. The same here. So that tells you that bears are very eager to sell. As soon as the bar closes, they're hitting the button on their computer to sell at the market. And the next tick is below the close of that bar. It's a sell the close bear trend. Bears are selling closes. And a lot of bears will keep doing it until they believe it's no longer a sell the close bear trend. High probability that the market will go lower. At least lower enough to make a profit. A small profit. At some point, you're going to get a reversal. At some point, you'll have enough bears taking profits and the market will start to go up. Remember, these bears now have stops way up here. The bears who sold up here, the markets down here now, their stops are way up here. Their risk is big. The best way to reduce the risk is by taking some profits. And if you have enough profit taking, you can get a series of bull bars. Enough to make the sell the close bears believe it's no longer a sell the close bear trend. This rally then is either a bear flag leading to another leg down or the start of a trading range. Good buying pressure. Three bull bars closing on their highs. A fourth bar closing above its midpoint. The bears assume that their sell the close bear trend has ended. And the market is either converting into a trading range or a bear flag. In either case, they're not expecting a lot lower prices for the time being. Many bears will add to their position as the bear trend resumes. Because a lot of them think that this is disappointing, sufficiently disappointing, so that the market probably will enter a trading range. Big down, big up, big confusion, sideways. They expect that sideways means if it gets back down to this low, there'll be buyers. And there will be. Some of those buyers will be the bears that sold here, happy to get out break even. Other buyers will be bears that sold here and sold more higher, looking to get out break even on their first entry, and with a profit on their second entry. And other buyers here will be bulls knowing that the bears will buy back at the low close, and expecting a bounce from the bears buying. A bear who adds on, there are different ways to do it. The bear who's adding on is looking to make a scalp. So his second entry has to be at least the size of a scalp greater than his first entry, preferably two to three times bigger than a scalp. And the market's getting near that low close. It's bouncing here. So the bears who sold here and here, or simply the bears who sold here, are concerned now that the market may not get down to that low close. If there's suddenly a very big bull bar, that would be a sign that the bears are giving up. And the bears who sold will buy back their shorts. Usually will lead to a swing up. However, this is not strong enough up for the bears to give up. They're still hopeful that the market will get down to that low close. They're trying to exit here, whether or not they added on. Some bears did not sell here. They understood what was going on. Sell the closed bear trend. Disappointed bears. Probably a conversion into a trading range. Probably a minor reversal. That means the market will probably test back down here. So some bears will just start selling up here. Again, their entry price has to be at least one to two times bigger than the minimum scalp size. They're expecting buyers to come in around the low close. And they want to be able to make a scalp. So they want to make sure that they're selling at least one, two or three times the size of a minimum scalp above their target price. Is this enough of a reversal to conclude that the bears are giving up and buying back their shorts? Well, it's a good reversal, but it's still about a 50% pullback and it's two legs up. One pull back two. We have a bear bar closing on its low. Some bears will sell below this bar. You have bears who sell the low close. They sell all of the closes. They sell the low close and then one or two or three times bigger than the minimum scalp. They'll sell more. Other bears take this cell and they'll only sell more below a bear bar like this. And they'll only sell more up here if the distance between here and their original entry is at least two or three times bigger than a minimum scalp. They're hoping to make a scalp. They sell below this bar, get filled here, and then look to buy back here. And since they're selling two to three times bigger than the minimum scalp above here, when the market comes back down here, they'll make a profit that is two to three times the size of a scalp. So many bears wanted to buy here that the market could not get there. The bears started placing limit orders just a little bit above the line just in case we did not get there. Eager buyers. And the same with the bulls. Bulls doing the same thing, thinking that there'll be buyers here. Strong enough rally so that probably buyers here. We have an undershoot. The market did not quite reach the line. Some bears will sell closes. They'll sell the size of a scalp or two to three times the scalp higher. And then they'll sell below a bear bar if this entry is two to three times as big as a minimum scalp above the first entry. If you take this trade, that trade, and this trade, you have to trade small enough so that your risk is no bigger than on any other trade. The stop for all of these bears, probably all the way up here. The top of the last major lower high. The market comes back here. And what happens? Support. The low close is support. The bears who sold here buy back their shorts. If they added on, they buy back their shorts for a scalp. If they did not sell here and instead sold here or here, they buy back their shorts for a profit. The bulls know the bears will buy and the bulls buy as well. And you get a bounce. Bears taking their profits. Bears, they place limit orders to buy at the lowest close. When it gets down to that low close, they buy. And that means bears buying, bulls are always buying, the low close becomes support. Strong enough rally, probably a trading range. Traders bought the low close and they get another bounce. Eventually, once you have a trading range, there is a 50% chance of trend resumption down. 50% chance of trend reversal up. Here, the bears got trend resumption down. Remember, wherever the bears are going to be buying, the bulls are always buying. And the bulls will buy at that low close as well. Other bulls will buy on a reversal up. Also, some bears will hold, taking a chance that we got a big breakout like we have over here. They are hoping it comes here. When it does not, and the market reverses up, the bears who did not exit at the low close will exit on the reversal up. Whenever there is a logical, reasonable buy signal in a trading range or in a weak bear train, bulls will buy and they will buy more lower. We have a bull trend, maybe a trading range, double bottom bull flag, double bottom high or low. Bulls will buy that reversal up. Believing that this is not strong enough to convert the bull trend into a bear trend. However, it might be enough to convert it into a trading range. They will buy here, taking a chance that we get a double bottom and a rally. Knowing that it may go lower, but probably not form a bear trend. So, some bulls will buy here, use a very wide stop, and then buy more above a bull bar on reversal up. What will happen when the market gets back to their original entry price? They will make a profit on this entry. They will be happy to get out break even on their original entry. That means the original entry price is resistance because you have bulls selling at that price. Bulls selling at a price makes that price resistance. I am now going to talk a little bit about our breakout test. We have a breakout and then the market pulls back to the breakout level. The market is reversing up. Good looking buy signal bar. The market is reversing up. Good looking buy signal bar. Good looking entry bar. Good looking entry bar. Good looking buy signal bar. The market is also a low for bulls. I am not going to pay for the breakout list. After buying, the market often tests back down to the original entry price to see if bulls will again buy at that price. Here it dipped below the price. It dipped below the price again here. And again, bulls bought. Bulls bought at the original entry price. The market reversed up strongly, a lower low major trend reversal, wedge bottom, 1, 2, 3, micro double bottom, good looking buy signal bar. The market tested the price here, the bulls bought again, the market came back down to test that price again, the bulls bought again. Both of these are undershoots, the market did not fall all the way down to the entry price. However, this entry price is support. This entry price is support, here it overshot the price, it fell below the entry price. And here it undershot it, it did not quite reach the top of the buy signal bar. I said entry price, I meant the top of the buy signal bar, the entry price is just a little bit above. After a strong reversal, a convincing reversal, a lot of bulls might scalp out part of their longs for a profit, and then place a limit order to buy again at either the signal bar high or their original entry price, just above that high. And if enough bulls are buying, the market will go up again. And the same is true here. Bulls bought above the entry price. They were so eager to buy, many bulls started placing limit orders just above that price, just in case it does not fall all the way down to the signal bar high. It's a sign of eager bulls, and they did it again here. Double bottom, high or low. Although it did not go up very far, the bulls did buy again above the original signal bar high. Other bulls buy on a reversal up. You have a breakout and then a pullback testing the breakout level, and they'll buy on a reversal up there or above this bar or above the bull bar here. Whenever there's a logical sell signal in a bear trend, a weak bear trend, or a trading range, bears will sell. For example here, we have a bull trend, maybe a wedge, one, two, three. One leg down, maybe a double top, lower high, maybe we'll get down to this high or low or that high or low. Decent bear bar. Some bears will sell here, betting that if we break out to the upside, this is the start of a trading range. The trading range will simply be higher, and they can sell more higher, expecting the market to come back to their original entry price. If the premise of a trading range is still valid, and it probably is, we have a bull breakout with bad follow through, bull bar, bad follow through, probably this whole thing is a trading range. Some bears will sell more. For example, below a bull bar on the reversal down, micro double top, one, two. Higher high major trend reversal. Bull trend, bear breakout, higher high. And the bulls who took this original sell will place a limit order to get out break even at their original entry price, or at the sell signal bar low. The bears who sold here will exit there as well, expecting disappointed bears to buy back their shorts at this level. If bears are buying here, chances are there will be a bounce. The bears selling here will buy here as well. So the signal bar low, the original entry price just below that low becomes support. Support is always a magnet, and the market tends to get drawn down to it, which it did over here. A lot of trading range price action. Leg one, pull back leg two. Failed breakout. Low two, and possibly a trading range or a weak bull trend. So some bears will sell just below the low of this bar, and they'll get filled here. The market often rallies back to test that entry price. You have some traders who bought that low, arguing maybe the start of a strong bull trend. They use very wide stops, and once they start to see this, they're hoping the market will come back here for these bulls to exit break even. As the market's going down, the bulls are more and more disappointed, and they're very hopeful that it'll get here so they can get out break even. So as it's going down, you have bulls hoping to be able to sell out of their lungs. You have bulls hoping to sell there. So bull selling creates resistance. And you have bears who sold here and made a profit. When it gets back there again, they're going to say, huh, the last time I sold here, I made money. It's back here again. I'm going to sell again. So you have bulls and bears selling at the signal bar low and the entry price low, just below the signal bar low. Selling where scale and bulls exit. Bulls bought here. They bought more lower, and they're happy to get out break even. Other bulls bought below this bar and used a very wide stop, bought more maybe above this bull bar, and happy to get out break even on their first entry and with a profit on their second entry. And the result is the bottom of that bar becomes resistance, an area where bulls will sell and bears will sell as well. The bulls who did not get out here were hoping for a resumption of the bull trend. Once they see the reversal down, if they did not exit here, they'll exit on the reversal down and get filled here. We have a bull trend line. Trending range, possibly lower high major trend reversal. And we have a bear break below the trend line. Bears will sell below a pullback. So we have a bear break up below the trend line and a small pullback. Bears will sell below the low of that pullback bar and get filled here, just below the low of that bar. You have bulls buying below that bar as well. Betting that the reversal will fail and that we'll be in a bull trend that continues higher. The bulls who did buy here will buy more lower and they'll hope to get out break even. The bears who sold here made a profit. And if it gets back to their price, they'll say, huh, I made money the last time I sold at that price level. If it gets back to that price level again, I'll sell again. And therefore you'll have both bulls and bears selling here. And this becomes resistance. A reasonable entry price for the bears becomes resistance. Scale-in bulls who bought here bought more lower, maybe above this bar. They'll be exiting there. So you have bull selling. The bulls who did not sell with a limit order have to sell on a reversal down in case this is the start of a bear trend. They'll exit below the low of the prior bar after the market gets back to the target. Reversal up. Bulls will buy. Good looking buy entry bar. And the market dipped below the low of the entry bar. And the market reversed up again. Very often the market will dip a little bit below the entry bar and then reverse up. Some bulls will place a limit order to buy at the bottom of that bar. It's a big bull trend bar, therefore a buy climax bar. The market often falls a little bit below the bottom of the buy climax bar and then rallies again just like it did over here. Some bulls will place a limit order to buy here. Others will buy on the reversal up, especially above a pretty good looking bull bar. We have a buy signal bar here. Some bulls will buy with a limit order at that low. Others will buy on the reversal up from a test below the original buy signal bar. The bottom of an entry bar. The bottom of a signal bar. Both are support. Two legs up, one two, decent bear bar, strong entry bar. This is the sell signal bar. This is the sell entry bar. It's a big bear trend bar, therefore a sell climax bar. And the high of a sell climax bar is always a magnet. Some bears theoretically have their protective stops just above that bar. And weak bears will get out there. Strong bears will sell there. Therefore, strong bear selling means that the high of that entry bar is resistance. Bears will be selling up there. Or they'll sell on a reversal down, especially below a bear bar. Breaking above the top of the sell entry bar, traders will sell either at that price or on a reversal down. In this video, I began by talking about how the closes in a buy the close bull trend can be resistance and how the closes in a sell the close bear trend can be support. Also, whenever the market breaks out and comes back to test the breakout point, that can be support in a bull trend and resistance in a bear trend. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of five videos on support and resistance. The Galápago people that turnover isników for the release of Shift 340 News of Ice Master Luke is a proxy member's rule which contains 5 orang-wandans. This is the fifth thing. And this Evan has secured for $10,000, the million service夠. This has expanded toward the Barabilia. This is primarily changed across the Cont minded group. We found out bikes and�ans whereEverything force can be support.**obe Ну交ay 好 often in Luna with Sal cancersc rep a box that counts it shake with持ちは no deals of the consensus.