 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching my Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on starting out as a trader. I first want to talk about how to advance as a trader. Next, I'm going to be talking about some emotions. In particular, I'll be talking about fear, greed, and uncertainty. When you start out, I think it's better to be pretty selective and look for only the one or two or three best swing trades of the day. Buying low, maybe selling high, buying low, selling high. Buying a 50% pullback. I know it's more than 50%, but it's about a 50%. We have a double bottom. We have a breakout below a double bottom that's reversing up, and it's around a 50% pullback. And then again, another 50% pullback here. Three pushes up, one, two, three. So a wedge top with a decent sell signal bar. Look for trades like that. I talk more about these in the video on best trades. Think about this for a second. If you start out making just one point a day in the E-mini, and then you work your way up to 10 contracts per trade, then that translates into $100,000 a year. If you get up to 25 contracts, that's $250,000 a year with just a single point per day. And if you ever get up to 100 contracts, that translates into a million dollars of profit. If you make only 10 pips a day in the Euro versus the dollar or any other Forex market, and then you trade 500,000 units per trade, that comes out to about $100,000 profit a year. If you work your way up to a bigger position size, like 5 million units per trade, that becomes a million dollars per year on a single 10 point scalp per day. The key is you have to learn how to read the price action. The price action is created by institutional traders. It's their footprints, and you can see what they've done, and it gives you an idea of what they will be doing. You want to be able to structure your trades in a way that you're paralleling the action of institutions. For example, look at the bulls who bought here. They're disappointed by that bear bar. They buy, they hold long during this bull bar, and then they get another disappointment bar at the top of a trading range. So you know the bulls are going to sell out of their longs, or a lot of them will. They're disappointed. And aggressive bears will short as well, expecting the bulls to sell. So if bulls are selling and bears are always selling, it's a good setup, and they're shooting for maybe a 10-pit profit. They'll get out somewhere down here. I want to talk a little bit about emotions. Most of the trading that takes place in any major market is being traded by computers, computer algorithms, and they use many variables, and they're based entirely upon math. When I say emotions are not variables that the computers consider, that is not entirely true, but for the most part, it's true. For example, some computers will look for words like fear or anger or depression or overbought or oversold, and they'll count the number of times those words are used in maybe Twitter over the course of the past five minutes, and they will make trades based upon that. But in general, the computers are basing their trades based upon the charts, not on emotions. So if you are having any kind of a feeling at all that is taking your attention away from trading, if you're worried, if you're greedy, if you're hopeful, if you feel restless, if you feel uncomfortable, if you feel confident, if you feel anything at all, you will be unable to structure trades the way the computers are structuring the trades, and you will lose money. Everyone has feelings. Everyone has feelings. You can't avoid it. But there are things that you can do to try to reduce their effect on your decision making. One important thing is if you care about losing money, if you're worried about losing money, if you're thinking about losing money all the time, you're not going to be objective, and you will not be able to see what the institutions are doing, and you will lose money. A good way around that is to trade the I don't care size. You trade small enough so you really do not care. And then once you decide on a size, trade maybe only 25% as big as the I don't care size. In other words, you trade very, very small. One of the advantages of trading Forex markets when you start out is that you can adjust your position size to any size position, and you can trade it with a very small account, and you can trade it with a very small account, and you can trade it with a very small account. You can trade a very small position size. It makes it easier to trade the I don't care size. Let's say you see a wedge. One, two, three, three pushes up, and you sell on the reversal down. First of all, that's not a good trade. You have about eight bull bars here, a very strong bull breakout, and we're getting higher lows and higher highs. Yes, it's a wedge. One, two, three, but I would wait for at least a second entry short. But if you did take that trade, and you trade small enough, even if you did finally give up here, your loss would not be all that big. So it gives you an opportunity to learn. You want to make sure that you're trading small enough so that your losses are not upsetting and preventing you from doing what you need to do. Fear and greed. These are emotions you hear all the time when people talk about the stock market, but many other emotions are important as well. They're really just theoretical concepts, and they do not exist in the trading world. Most traders, most professional traders who are making money, don't continue to oscillate between, oh my gosh, I'm so afraid, and oh wow, I'm making a lot of money, I've got to make a lot more. That kind of stuff belongs in the movies, and traders really don't think about them. As far as fear and greed go, they're really not important to a professional trader. A beginner definitely has fear, and what is a beginner fearful of? Well, they're afraid of losing money because, in their eyes, it's the equivalent of death, death of their dream as a trader. They saved up enough money to allow them to try trading to see if they could make it as a professional trader, and losing money to the point that their account has so little money that they no longer meet margin requirements, and they're no longer able to trade, that's the equivalent of death. They're also afraid to be seen as an addict, or a weak person, or a gambler, and it's really not fair, because let's say you're a real estate investor, and you buy an apartment complex, and then you sell it three years later, and you buy another apartment complex. Well, guess what? You're a trader. Your timeframe is just three years between trades, and it's no different from a Forex trader or an e-mini trader taking a trade and exiting five minutes later, ten minutes later. All that's different is the timeframe, and everybody is a trader. Beginners are also afraid of the feelings of their spouses. They don't want their spouses to become impatient, angry. When are you going to start making money? When are you going to stop losing money? When are you going to stop losing money? If you're going to stop losing money, you're going to stop losing money. And then another fear that a lot of traders have, but they don't realize they have, is that they are afraid of becoming more successful than they think they deserve to be. And that can hold them back. So they'll intentionally sabotage themselves because they're afraid to see themselves as an excellent trader making a lot of money. When traders are afraid, I think it's usually because traders do not understand the markets, and they do not understand themselves. A professional trader just looks at the market and doesn't get upset by anything. He just accepts that anything can happen at any time. For example, here, look at the size of this drop. This is the Euro versus the Swiss Franc, and it happened overnight. And a 20% crash. To a professional trader, he'll look at that and say, huh, I haven't seen that in a while. Whereas a beginner will look at that and say, oh my gosh, the Euro is crashing against the Swiss Franc, and who knows what's going to happen after this. It's going to be disastrous. To a professional trader, no big deal. And he'll say to himself, huh, I haven't seen that in a while. That's how professional traders look at things like this. They just don't get upset about it. And then two days later, the professional trader is on to the next trade, and he's not even thinking about this anymore. Skilled traders, they're never afraid. They understand what's going on. They understand that the probability of anything is rarely more than 60%. So that means usually, most of the time, they're going to be wrong 40% of the time. So they just don't get upset. They understand what makes a reasonable trade. They know how to manage their trade, and they can handle anything that comes their way. They also make a point to minimize their risk. They never let their risk get beyond a certain point. They know that when they enter a trade, they make sure that they take a position size, allow for scaling in if they're scale-in traders, and they make sure that the total risk on any trade, even a trade where they do scale in, is no bigger than on any other trade. Skilled traders, they're confident that they can handle anything, even a crash. And as the price action unfolds, they get more information. They go through a mental checklist, and they do what is appropriate, including exiting and waiting. Why no greed? Because they understand the math. If the profit is good enough for the probability and the risk, they'll always take some off, and the result is a pullback, or at least a pause. They buy this for a second leg up, strong bull breakout, pullback. They buy a high one bull flag, a little pullback, and they see the market stalling. A lot of traders will take some profits here, and they'll take profits here, and that's what's causing the pullback. They try not to get greedy. They always take some off when they have good profits, and it appears that the market is at a resistance level and might be stalling. Greed. When a person is greedy, they want more than what is logical. You cannot make money if it's illogical. You have to have a logical approach to management, otherwise you're going to lose. So you just stay calm, and you just be objective, and you use logic to guide your management. Now, I said that all good traders are fairly immune to emotion, but they obviously are always feeling something, but they're very good at not letting emotions influence their decisions. However, emotions can be useful. You can use them as radar to find opportunities. They tell you what the market is doing, and that gives you an idea of what to do at any given moment. In particular, when traders are confused, that is an important feeling. Confusion, uncertainty, very important to a trader, and your radar needs to be able to detect it. When you're starting out, it's easy to be confused because you're confused all the time, but even professional traders get confused. That simply means that the probability is not as high as traders want it to be, and that usually means that the market is not going to go too far up and not going to go too far down. Then traders expect a trading range. So it's important to sense when you are confused, when you are uncertain, when you're disappointed. If you're selling and then the market reverses up strongly, you're a disappointed bear. If it's rallying strongly and it reverses down, you're a disappointed bull. And uncertainty, confusion, disappointment, bad follow through, those are all signs that the market's in a trading range. And when it's in a trading range, you expect the opposite. You expect breakouts to fail. So no matter how strong the market is moving down, you expect it to go up. No matter how strong it's going up, you expect it to go down. And you trade it that way. You buy low, you sell high, and you scale. This is very different from over here. Here, traders are uncertain. They're not sure what the market is doing. They are pretty certain that it's not going to go too far up or too far down. And they're disappointed by the follow through. That tells them that the market's in a trading range. On the other hand, let's say you see this. Four bars up, five bull bars, six bull bars, gaps between the close of the bar and the high of the prior bar. There's a sense of urgency like, oh wow, I got to buy. That is a feeling. That sense of urgency is important. And when you have it, you got to get into the market. Even if you trade very small, it's really important to get in as early as possible. It doesn't matter if you buy here or here. You're still almost certainly going to make money. However, it's easier to make money if you buy early on. Your risk is less and the profit potential is more. So you use these feelings to make money. Uncertainty and disappointment, if that's what you're feeling, that tells you that you believe the market is in a trading range. And in a trading range, you want to be buying low. You buy to buy back a short or to put on a long. You sell high to sell out of a long or to put on a short. And you take quick profits because you believe the market is not going to go very far. On the other hand, if you have a sense of urgency, like, oh, I got to wait for a pullback. This is going up far too fast. And my stop is too far away. I don't want to risk that much. Whenever you have that sense that you're missing a strong trend, the best thing to do is just trade immediately at the market. Buy at least a small position. Use the appropriate stock. So that sense of urgency is telling you that you have to get into the position. In this case, you have to get long, at least a very small position. And you're waiting for a pullback and it never comes. Or when it comes, it's too small. And you end up waiting, waiting, waiting, and you end up missing a huge trend. As soon as you start hoping for a pullback, that's the time to buy at least small. Your stop is obviously down here. So you just trade a size that is appropriate for a stop at that location. And it doesn't matter how you buy. You can buy closes. You can buy at the market. You can buy below bars. You can buy above bars. You can buy a bear close here, here, here. Betting the bear reversal will fail. It doesn't matter. You just have to get long. You can buy a trend resumption up. You can buy above a bull bar. You're going to pull back here. Buy above the high of the bull reversal. Betting that the trend is about to resume. So you can buy with a stop order. Now, can anyone really make money? Sure. Lots of traders make a lot of money. Some students are extremely profitable. I get emails from traders regularly telling me that they're making a lot of money. And so, yes, it's possible. But it takes a lot of work. And the websites that make it sound like it's easy, just spend a couple weeks learning a few things. I just don't believe that that's possible. That's why I have so many videos here. I'm trying to provide the information that a trader needs to really be successful. The traders who are making money, they study. After the market closes, they make notes. They go back to my video course, to my books, to any other reference information that they have. They look at charts that they've collected over time and made notes on. They're constantly taking notes until they learn how to trade properly, until things are pretty much reflexive. You don't have to be perfect. All you have to do is be consistently good. So the goal, obviously, is to make money. But don't worry about being perfect. Only look to be good. Here are some actual emails from traders who have studied the course. And these traders have done very well. In this video, I talked about how you start out as a trader and how you progress. In particular, how you can make a lot of money if you get consistently profitable and simply increase your position size. And then I talked about emotions and how computers, for the most part, ignore them and traders have to learn how to minimize them. However, your feelings are a radar. And if you're feeling a lot of fear and greed, that tells me that you're starting out and you're worried about the wrong things. You're probably trading too big. You should trade, I don't care size. On the other hand, if you're feeling uncertain or confused, the market is probably in a trading range. So you should trade like a trading range. If you feel like the market is racing up or down and you're waiting for a pullback to enter, there's a sense of urgency. Then you have to trade small and enter at the market. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on starting out as a trader.