 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the first of four videos on major trend reversals. I'll begin by distinguishing a major from a minor reversal. Next, I'll make the point that a major trend reversal is the most important reversal pattern. Most reversal patterns involve trading ranges. I'll begin by talking about major trend reversals. And throughout the course of the next several videos, I will talk about the other types of reversals as well. Here we have a bull trend. When the market's in a bull trend, traders assume that every reversal down will be minor and form either a trading range or a bull flag and that the bull trend will resume. Here we have a break below the bull trend line, the bottom of the channel, and we have five out of six bars having bare bodies. It's not all that strong on the part of the bears. However, there's enough selling pressure here for traders to think that perhaps, yes, it's a minor reversal. But once the bull trend resumes, there's an increased chance of a major trend reversal. And this is true, especially because of a wedge top. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Yes, minor reversal. You expect the bull trend to resume. Some traders will sell below this bar. Other traders will wait until there's a strong bear breakout. Here we have three consecutive bear bars with good sized bodies, and then they'll sell here, looking for at least a couple of legs down from there. Minor reversal. The bull trend resumed, but it did not get very far, and it failed around the old high. Head and shoulders top. Expect a second leg down. Wedge top. Expect at least two legs down. One pull back, two. Traders will sell below here, either for a swing or simply for a scalp down for a second leg. Strong bear breakout. At this point, the market's always in short by the close of this bar, and the odds are we're going lower. And it looks like this is probably going to be a major reversal and go down for at least another leg or two. Some traders will sell here. Other traders will wait to sell either that close or below this bear bar, looking at this as a minor reversal in now a bear trend. The wedge channel is fairly tight. The pullbacks are small here and here. And we have a good tight bull channel here. Therefore, traders are not looking at this as a higher high major trend reversal. In other words, bull trend, break below a very tight bull channel, and then bull trend resumption. Most traders would not look at this as a higher high major trend reversal. They would look at it as a wedge, maybe, but not as a major trend reversal. Now they'll start wondering after six bear bars here or six bars down here, traders will start wondering, are the bears getting strong enough to create a major trend reversal? In general, whenever you're taking a major trend reversal sell setup like this, there's a 40% chance you'll get a swing down, 60% chance you'll either stay sideways or the bull trend will resume up. The market's in a bear trend here. Traders assume that every reversal up is going to be minor, especially after this bear breakout when it's clearly bearish. The reversal attempt, minor. This reversal attempt has pretty good buying pressure, but it's still probably minor. And then the bear trend resumed even stronger than the bulls rallied here. And therefore, traders assume that this reversal attempt is minor as well. However, it's a very strong reversal attempt and it totally reversed this strong sell-off. And therefore the odds are that either the market now is in a trading range or possibly even a bull trend. They'll look for the bear trend to resume and a lot of them will buy a reversal up, betting that in fact, we're forming a higher low in a new bull trend. The bear trend tried to resume. The bears have six bear bars, but a higher low. And this forms a slightly higher low major trend reversal, maybe above this bull bar. And it's also a double bottom higher low major trend reversal. In general, traders want to see the bear trend retrace at least a third or so of the minor reversal. If the bears are able to do that, traders will assume the bear low has been adequately tested. If it reverses up from there, they're more willing to buy, betting that a major trend reversal is underway. In general, 40% chance that a major trend reversal will actually lead to a major reversal, a reversal into an opposite trend. We have a minor reversal that's very strong, strong enough so that we'll probably get a second leg up. You can argue there's a wedge here, one, two, three, but we did get two small legs down, one pull back, two. This is enough of a reversal so that traders expect a 40% chance of a swing up and probably a 50% or 60% chance of a test back up to these highs. Again, traders like to buy above the bull bar, especially after five consecutive bear bars. Most traders will not buy above the bear bar. So they'll either buy above this bull bar or above this bar and get filled here. And you can see a lot of traders bought during this bar. The successful reversal from this high or low major trend reversal means two legs up and a profit that is at least twice your actual risk. If you buy above the high of this bar, your actual risk turned out to be just too below the low of this bar. And this is several times greater than that actual risk. Most major trend reversals result in big trading ranges. For example, we have a bull trend, a lower high major trend reversal. And at this point we're in a trading range. Now we have a bear trend and a bull break above the trend line. And now we have a higher low major trend reversal. And at this point it's still part of a large trading range. However, legs within a trading range can be big enough for a swing trade. Swing traders selling here or here or here made a swing profit. And swing trading bulls who bought above here or above here made a swing profit as well. We have a bear trend here. If ever you see a reversal and you're wondering if it's a major reversal but it does not look quite right, you should expect it to be a minor reversal. And a minor reversal means a reversal into either a bear flag or into a trading range. For example, here we have a bear trend and we have an attempt to reverse but a minor reversal. Is this enough of a reversal up for traders to expect the next reversal up to be a major reversal? No, it's not enough buying pressure. It only lasted a few bars. If you look at a smaller timeframe chart, you might start looking for a major reversal. But on this chart, this is not enough buying pressure for traders to look for a major trend reversal. So the next reversal up is probably going to be minor, which means a bear flag or part of a trading range. You can buy this. It's a high two, high one here, high two here. Wedge one, two, three. A higher low, a double bottom higher low, a decent reversal bar. However, you're buying this expecting a minor reversal. You're expecting a scalp. You're expecting the rally to not last very long and not become a swing up. You're only looking for a pullback that is either going to end up as a part of a trading range or a bear flag. We have a bull trend here. And if you're looking for a reversal and it does not look quite right, it's probably a minor reversal. A reversal into a trading range or a bull flag and you expect the bull trend to resume. Bull trend here. Minor reversals became a bull flag. The bull trend resumed. We're trying to get a bull trend here. Is this probably going to be a major reversal down? It might be. However, we have two very big bull bars here and only a two bar pullback here. This is probably a minor reversal and probably either a bull flag or part of a trading range. Therefore, if traders are looking at this as a potential major reversal or this as a major trend reversal, they'll be disappointed. This is not enough selling pressure for traders to expect the next reversal to be major. The next reversal is probably going to be minor. You can take this trade. It's a second entry short, a micro double top, a double top bear flag, a lower high, but very good buying pressure. This reversal down is probably minor. A minor reversal in this early bull trend. If you take that trade, you're looking for a scalp, not for a swing trade. Major trend reversals, they have about a 40% chance of leading to a swing trade, which is fine because the swing trade means a profit at least twice as big as your risk. And that more than offsets the 40% low probability. A lot of times the first reversal does not work. We have a bull trend, very strong break up. And here we have a second entry for a lower high major trend reversal. First entry, no one's going to take that. Four consecutive bull bars, five consecutive bull bars. You wait for a second entry. This is a second entry, lower high major trend reversal. And look what you got. You got a big reversal up from a higher low. Not a successful trade. A lot of traders would exit their short above here. And now we have another micro double top and a double top. And it's a second entry short for a major trend reversal. This time it's a double top, lower high. This double top is below this high. So it's a double top, lower high. You have a bear bar here. This is another short. And it did not succeed either. Most bears would get out here. We have a second entry by here or above here. And they'd have a small profit. Here they'd have maybe a small profit or break even. Now the market's going up higher. And we have a wedge. Three pushes up. One, two, and then three. Micro double top here. Nested wedge. Three pushes up. One, two, three. And it's slightly below this high. You can call the entire pattern a double top. This is slightly below that. You can say it's a lower high major trend reversal. But it is a potential major trend reversal. And traders can take this short for a swing down. 60% of the time when you have a reasonable major trend reversal setup, you're going to get a minor reversal from the major reversal setup. And you'll have a small profit or a small loss. But 40% of the time, you'll get a reward that is at least twice as big as your risk. And often the reward will be several times bigger than your risk. And that more than makes up for a 40% chance of a swing trade profit. Of the 60% of the trades that are not swing trade profits, half of them are small losses. Half of them are small gains. And they offset each other. So 60% of the time, it's basically break even. 40% of the time, you make a substantial profit if you manage the trade well. Here we have three different major trend reversal setups. One out of the three led to a swing trade. The other two break even, maybe a small profit, small profit. There are many types of reversals. Wedge tops, double tops, climatic tops, bottoms. Major trend reversal is the most important reversal pattern for most traders. A major trend reversal has a strong traders equation. The math is good. The math makes sense. Even though the trade has only a 40% chance of a successful swing trade, the strong risk reward ratio more than makes up for the low probability. We have a bear trend and a pretty good breakout here. Is this a major trend reversal? Probably not. It's only two bars down. However, now we have 10 or 15 bars sideways. This is a higher probability for a swing trade. A double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. Some traders would put their stop here. Other traders would keep their stop down here. Now we have another double bottom. And again, this double bottom is a higher low. So a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. Two legs down, one pull back two. Two legs down, one pull back two. A nested pattern. A very dramatic two bar reversal. This is a good buy setup for a potential swing trade. Traders will look for, at a minimum, 10 bars, two legs up. Realistically, there's a 40% chance that they'll get a swing up. A swing trade means 20 or more bars, at least two legs, and at least a reward twice the risk. And here, the bull's got a reward several times the risk. We have a bull trend here. A broad bull channel, a bear breakout. I don't have the line drawn, but bull trend, bear breakout. And a big higher high. So it's a higher high, major trend reversal. Not a very high probability short, because this channel up is so tight. But it's a reasonable short, because the reversal is so dramatic. If you take this short, your stop is above this high. So you have to trade small. If you do not take that short, you can wait and then maybe look for a lower high, major trend reversal, and sell here. Bear trend. A bull break above the bear trend. Here's the bear trend. Here's the breakout. And you can call this a triangle. Three pushes down. One, two, three. Mostly a horizontal pattern with three pushes down, and it's converging. It's sloped slightly down, maybe. You can call it a wedge if you want. A wedge bull flag. We have an early bull trend. A wedge bull flag. You can call it a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. It doesn't matter what you call it. It's a buy setup above the high of this bull bar. You can call this a wedge top if you'd like. If you want, you can call it a bull trend. A bear breakout. A higher high, major trend reversal. Or you can say three pushes up. One, two. These two legs. You can call these two legs one. One, second, and then third. Or you can say we have a wedge top. One, two, three. That failed. And now we have a second top. A bull breakout above a bull channel. 75% chance you're going to get a reversal down. Again, it doesn't matter what you call it, but it's a reasonable setup for a major reversal. Two legs down. One pull back. Two. Two. Three. Two. One. Get both. One. One. One. One. Two. Really? Two. What's the wrong? One. One. One. Two. One. Two. Two. One. Two. One. Two. One. Two. Two. Two. Two. One. to be a major reversal. You expect only a minor reversal and a trading range or a bull flag. This is enough bars for a major reversal. And anytime you have a major head and shoulders top, you have a lower high major trend reversal. I said that a major trend reversal has a 40% chance of leading to a swing trade. The advantage is the risk is small. You're entering early before there's a confirmed reversal. The reversal only comes after a strong breakout in your direction. Here we have a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. There's a little bit of reversal up, but then reversal down. Big up, big down, big confusion, sideways. And now we're reversing up again, but we only pulled back a little bit. At this point, is this a strong bull trend? Of course not. But it is a good major trend reversal setup. At this point, it's probably a bull trend somewhere up in here. But at this point, it's a reversal, but not yet a strong bull trend. The probability is only about 40% if you buy here. Now we have the reversal. We have a series of consecutive big bull bars closing on their highs. So, buying at this point has a much higher probability of a profit. Whenever you have high probability, your risk reward is worse. The stop for these bulls, buying either this close or that close, is down here. So the risk is greater. However, that's the price you pay when you take a high probability trade. Up here, we have a lower high, major trend reversal. A small double top. A decent two bar reversal. A reasonable setup, but you're in a tight training range. More likely, we're going to go mostly sideways. However, it's a reasonable setup. It is not yet a reversal. It's a reversal setup. After you see a series of bear bars, here we have three bear bars closing on their lows. Traders begin to suspect that this is, in fact, the early stages of reversal. And then a big bear bar here, big bear bar here, follow through bar here. So at this point, traders are probably comfortable that this is an early reversal. It never had the momentum down that this had going up. So it never had the high probability that the bulls had over here. But at some point in here, here or here, traders conclude that a reversal is unfolding. The advantage of entering early with a major trend reversal setup, it minimizes risk. If you sell here, your stop is here. You're looking for a reward at least twice your risk. And you got that here. Same here. If you buy here, your stop is here. And you would have gotten out here or here. And you would have had a reward several times greater than your risk. You paid for the small risk, big reward with lower probability. If you take the early entry. If you take the later entry, your risk reward is worse, but the probability of making money is high. 60% or higher. Higher low major trend reversal. Lower high major trend reversal. Here's the reversal pattern. Here's the reversal. Now we have a high probability of higher prices. Reversal setup. Starting to get a bear breakout. As the bear bars get added, the probability starts to go up that you're going to get lower prices. Here's the reversal. Now we have a low trend trend reversal. Most traders would not conclude that this is always in short until you had at least three bear bars or one or two big bear bars. Big bear bar follow through bar. Most traders would not conclude this is always in long until you started to get consecutive bull trend bars. Either here, or here, or here. Consecutive bear trend bars again. We have consecutive bear trend bars here closing on their lows. And again here. At this point or this point, most traders would conclude the market is in control of the bears, and that we're going lower. A bear trend. So you have a bear trend line. You have a strong break above the bear trend line. We went sideways, and then we had a reasonable higher low major trend reversal. Traders want to see more than just one bar. They want to see follow through buying. Here we have a second consecutive bull trend bar closing on its high. And now we have an even stronger bull trend bar closing on its high. The bears are giving up, and bulls are taking control. The bulls are buying aggressively, and they're expecting some kind of a measured move up at a minimum. The breakout convinces traders, both the bulls and the bears, that it's now a bull trend. Again, higher probability to buy after you see the strong bull breakout. You pay for that high probability with greater risk because the stop is further away. It doesn't matter if you buy here, here or here, the stop is still down here. But buying up here, you have a higher probability of making money. A very big bull bar. You can buy this close, or you can buy the close of the follow-through bar, or the close of this follow-through bar after this big two bar breakout. Stop below the bottom of the bull breakout. This is a bull breakout by climax. A major higher low. Double bottom, higher low. Double bottom, here's the old low. This is a double bottom above that low, so it's a double bottom higher low. And it's a break above a bull trend line, so it's a double bottom higher low, major trend reversal, buy setup. When you have a strong bull breakout above a bear trend line, traders watch for a higher low. Sometimes you get a lower low reversal, sometimes you get a higher low reversal. Sometimes you get a perfect double bottom. In any case, traders watch for a resumption of the bear trend that fails and reverses up. And they look to buy the reversal up. Reverse up here. Reverse up here. It's no longer a bear trend. It could be a trading range. It is a trading range. But it could also lead to a bull trend. The bulls buy, knowing that it might simply be a trading range, or it might be a bull trend. They're hoping that the reversal up leads to the first of many higher lows. This low is above the bear trend low, just as this low is above the bear trend low. This led to a wedge, basically an expanding triangle, one, two, three. And you can see a lot of the bulls gave up here. They bought again here, and this time they got a swing up, and a series of higher lows. Here, here, here, even here. We have a bull trend. We have a bear break below the trend line. We have another bear break below the trend line here. This is a lower high major trend reversal. I drew this trend line. I could have drawn a trend line here and said that this is the break below the trend line, and it is. This would then be a higher high major trend reversal, and then a lower high major trend reversal. It's also a broad bull channel, deep pullbacks. So you could draw a trend line using that low, or even this low as well. All of them are acceptable ways to show the bull trend. The bears broke below the bull trend line using this reversal up and this reversal up. Yet, look what happened. Very bad follow through selling. Strong reversal down bear bar, but instead of a series of consecutive bear bars, we got a very big reversal up. The traders are not convinced that this is the start of a bear trend, even though it's a higher high major trend reversal. I could draw a trend line here. A bear break below the trend line. Higher high major trend reversal, but very strong bull trend resumption up. The market might instead be resuming up in a broad bull channel, or it might be a trading range. Big up, big down, big confusion. Now we have big up, big down, and big up again. Big confusion usually means trading range, but whenever there's a trading range, there's always a sell setup, and there's always a buy setup as well. Here we have a potential lower high major trend reversal. Even though we're trending down here, it's not all that strong. No big bear breakout with good follow through. Many traders see this as a bear leg in a trading range, and it is. We're up, we're down, we're up, we're down. We're still above this low. We're still above this low. It's a bear leg in a trading range. However, it lasted about 20 bars, and that is enough for a swing trade down. Even though we do not have a bear trend, we have a bear swing. Here we have a bear breakout and a bear follow through bar. This is more likely to lead to some kind of a swing trade. Whenever there's a break below any bull trend line, the bears watch for resumption of the bull trend and for a lower high. If the market goes above the old high, then they look for a reversal down from a higher high. In any case, after they get a break below a trend line, traders are watching the next resumption of the bull trend to see if it fails and create some kind of a double top, a lower high, a perfect double top, higher high. They want a reversal down. They want the resumption to fail for the market to begin a swing down. Traders will look to sell. We have a micro double top here. We have a bigger double top here. They'll sell below this low. They'll sell below this bear bar. We have a lower high in a bear channel. They'll sell below that bar. Now we have a micro double top this high, that high. They'll sell below that bar. At some point, traders conclude that it's no longer a bull channel. It's either a trading range or a bear trend. Somewhere in here, more and more traders are concluding the bull trend has ended. Once the market falls below a major higher low like here or here, traders would conclude the bull trend is definitely over and that the market's either in a trading range or a bear trend. And they're hoping that this lower high is the first of many lower highs. And a series of lower highs means a bear channel, which is a bear trend. We have a bear channel. We have a bull breakout, not especially strong. Three or four bars up, five or six bars up. However, traders will wonder if the next reversal down will fail and lead to a reversal up, a major trend reversal. This is probably a minor reversal. I say that because this bull breakout only lasted about four bars. So the next reversal up probably will not get too far and the bulls probably would need some kind of a double bottom. They'll buy here either for a scalp or a swing. Now they have a double bottom. You can call it a lower low major trend reversal, but really not much buying pressure here or here. This is possibly simply a minor reversal. However, some traders will buy it certainly for a scalp, possibly for a swing. I don't have it drawn in, but if I drew a trend line here, this is a strong break above a trend line. And therefore the next reversal down, if it fails, could lead to a major reversal. To me, this is more of a major trend reversal, buying above this bull bar. We have a micro-noble bottom after a strong bull breakout above the bull channel. Very good breakout here. Maybe a minor reversal and a trading range. Maybe a trading range and a bear trend. So bulls, they either buy here or here, or they buy here betting on a major reversal. 40% chance. If they want higher probability, they wait until they see a strong breakout or a good follow-through bar. The bears are giving up. The bears in this bar have decided that they've lost control over the market. A very big bull bar. That's a sign of the bears panicking out and a sign of the bulls buying aggressively. The odds of follow-through buying after a strong breakout with follow-through like this, 60 or 70%, that if you buy here or here, you're going to get some kind of a measured move up. So, there's a rally right here. We have a bull trend and we have a rally up here. And we have a double top, maybe a slightly higher high major trend reversal. And it follows a weak sell-off like this, only two bars down. Usually, this reversal is minor. And if you're looking for a swing trade, it's usually better to wait until there's a strong bear breakout and then resumption up. And then you look for that resumption up to fail. This short and this short, minor reversals. But once you have a strong bear breakout, if the market resumes up and fails again, then this is more likely to lead to a major reversal. Only two bars down, probably a minor reversal. So, this is probably a minor reversal down. This is probably a minor reversal down. It might be major, but usually with only a two bar sell-off that does not even get close to the moving average, the next reversal down will be minor and lead to a trading range rather than a bear trend. If you want a swing trade, it's better to wait until you see very strong selling by the bears. And then you wait for the bull trend to resume and look for that resumption to fail. This is a lower high major trend reversal. 40% chance of a swing down. Shorting here or shorting here, probably just a scalp because not enough selling pressure for traders to believe the bull trend will become a bear trend. After this, we have good selling pressure. That's a sign that the bears can be strong. Bears then will try to reverse the trend and get a swing down after the next resumption up. A bull trend. It's a wedge. One, two, three. And we have a pretty good reversal down here. This is probably good enough for a major trend reversal, although it ended up being a high two bull flag. Two legs down. One, pull back two. However, it broke strongly below the bear trend. And traders, therefore, will look for the next leg up to fail around the old high. And we have a slightly higher high major trend reversal. You can call it an expanding triangle. Three pushes up here. Higher high. Higher high. And we have a lower low here. But to me, I would just call it a major trend reversal. You can also call it a consecutive top. We have a head and shoulders top. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. And it failed. And now we're trying to top again with a higher high major trend reversal. A reasonable sell. Micro double top here. Consecutive tops. We have a head and shoulders top here. And now we're topping out again. Higher high major trend reversal after good selling pressure. The bears were strong here. Maybe with a new high, they'll be strong again and they'll be able to create a swing down. You can sell here. You can sell here. Now we have a strong bear breakout. Traders believe the bears are taking control. And a pullback. A reversal attempt probably will fail. Traders will sell below that bear bar expecting a swing down. This is a small double top lower high. Even though this high is below that high, I still look at it as a small double top. Double top bear flag after a strong bear breakout. I mentioned that we have a wedge. One, two, three. Led to two legs down. The bull trend resumed. And now we have a potential expanding triangle top. And every expanding triangle top is a higher high major trend reversal. That's a reasonable sell. Lower high major trend reversal. But we got a trading range instead of a bear trend. I call this a lower low major trend reversal. A bear trend bull breakout. Lower low major reversal. I think it's probably more a minor reversal because there's not much buying pressure here. But more likely this is going to lead to a trading range instead of a bull trend. Here you have a double bottom. Higher probability of a bull trend. But it's still probably minor. Once you get this, a series of bull bars, and then a resumption on the bear trend, you have a better chance of getting a major reversal. A lot of bears did not exit here. They assumed the bull reversal would be minor and lead to lower prices. A lot of bears did not exit here. Again, they were assuming it's a minor reversal that would lead either to a trading range or a bear flag. However, then they saw this and they changed their minds. Now they were trying to get the bear trend to resume. They failed. They failed again and they gave up here. Once you get a breakout like this, the bears are hoping for any kind of a pullback so they can buy back their shorts with a smaller loss. Strong breakout. The bears are hoping for a deep pullback so they can buy back their shorts with a smaller loss. And the bulls, once they see this, they believe the market's going higher. They're hoping for any kind of a pullback so they can buy and get long. They're expecting a second leg up. And then once the market starts to go up like this, it's clear the market's going higher. The bears are trapped and they have to buy back their shorts. After this strong break above the bear channel, both the bulls and bears expected a second leg up. The bears used the pullback to buy back their shorts. The bulls used their pullback to buy as well. With both bulls and bears buying, the odds are high. You're going to get at least a small second leg. Here we get a very big second leg. Bulls who wanted higher probability, they wait until they see a very strong bull breakout. And they buy the close here or buy the close here. Again, if you're buying after the strong breakout, your stop is down here. Your risk is greater and that's what you have to pay if you want a high probability trade. I began by talking about the difference between a major reversal looking for an opposite swing or trend and a minor reversal looking for a trading range or a bear flag or a bull flag. A major trend reversal is the most important type of reversal pattern because it is a reversal from one trend into an opposite trend or at least into an opposite swing. And traders have the potential to make a swing profit, a big profit. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on major trend reversals.