 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading tight bear channels. I want to begin by defining what I mean by a tight bear channel. In general, if the market's in a channel, a bear channel, and it's very difficult to make money buying, you know the channel is tight and you should only be looking to sell. A tight bear channel is usually a strong bear breakout on a higher timeframe chart, and therefore, again, you should only be looking to sell. Sometimes when the market's in a tight bear channel, there'll be a bull channel lasting five or ten bars, and it's almost always a bear flag. The market will have a bear breakout. But if the pullback grows endlessly, it becomes an endless pullback, and after 10, 20, or 30 bars, the odds start to become as likely that there'll be a bull breakout of the bear channel. And if you do get a strong bull breakout above the bear channel, the market becomes always in long. Any channel can be tight or broad. Here are a couple of bear channels. And I refer to this as tight. When a channel looks like this, the pullbacks are small, lasting only one or two bars, and they do not extend very high up in terms of the number of ticks. It's a tight channel. And when the channel is tight, it's very hard to make money trading against it. And therefore, if you're in a tight bear channel, you should only be selling. You should look for any reason to sell. However, when a channel has pullbacks lasting five or 10 bars, and bulls are able to make money buying with limit orders or even buying with stops, then the bulls are reasonably strong and traders will sometimes buy in addition to sell. However, it's still a bear channel, a bear trend, and therefore, it's always better to sell, especially for swings. The bears will sell every pullback betting on a reversal down, and the bulls will start buying at new lows and reversals up for scalps. The bears are selling for scalps and swings. The bulls will buy for scalps only because it's a bear trend. They're not going to swing trade. When you look at a chart and you're not sure if it's tight or broad, these channels are fairly similar. If you're not sure if it's tight or broad, assume it's tight and only trade in the direction of the trend. The reason why I like to distinguish tight channels from broad channels is because I trade them differently. The tighter it is, the more I'm only going to be trading in the direction of the trend. Here, a tight bear channel I only want to sell. On the other hand, if it's fairly broad, I will trade in the direction of the trend, but I may take scalps in the opposite direction. The math is much better for the bears when the channel is tight. Very difficult to make money buying when the pullbacks are small and only last a couple bars, one or two bars. The rallies are not going up far enough for the bulls to make money. Bears should sell and bulls should not be looking to buy, especially when it gets very tight like this. Let me give you some ideas on how to distinguish a tight channel from a bull channel. If the pullbacks only last one or two bars, here's two bars, here's one bar, here's a couple bars, one bar, then it's probably tight. I also always pay attention to the smallest scalp size. And in the e-mini, the smallest scalp size is one point. If the pullbacks are all less than two to three times as big as the smallest scalp, then I'm not going to be looking to buy. The smallest scalp is one point. And if the top of the pullback is only two or three points above the bottom of the bear trend, it's better not to look to buy. For example, if you were buying with a stop above here, it's very difficult to make a profit with a stop entry buying above the height of the prior bar, because the pullback is not going to go up very far, and you're already buying fairly far up above the low relative to the height of the channel. I also pay attention to how big the pullbacks are compared to the size of the average bar. This particular channel, the average bar is two to two and a half points tall. That means if the pullbacks are less than four to five points, I don't want to be looking to buy. Too difficult to make money. And that is the case here. The bars are averaging two to two and a half points tall, and the pullbacks are not two or three times bigger than the average bar size. That makes it very difficult to make money buying. Traders should only sell. Here, this is an average bar in this particular day, and it's 10 ticks tall. And therefore, traders should not be buying unless you're seeing pullbacks that are at least twice as big as that, preferably three times as big as that. And that's not the case. The pullbacks are not two to three times the height of an average bar. I also pay attention to how far the pullback retraces the prior leg. Here, we have a bare leg, and the pullback retraced about half of the bare leg. If the pullbacks only retrace one-third to one-half of the prior bare leg, it's usually better not to be looking to buy. Also, look at how profitable the buy setups are. Here, we have a bull II. Here, we have a bull reversal bar for a failed breakout. Are the bulls easily making money, or is it very difficult to make money? If all of the stop entry buys are losers, even when there are reasonably good buy signal bars, then traders should not be looking to buy. Gaps are always important, and if you get a breakout and then a reversal attempt, and the reversal attempt cannot get above the breakout point, then the trend is strong. And that, again, makes it very difficult to make money buying. Think about it this way. You have bulls buying at the prior low, scaling in lower. They need the rally to come back above the breakout point for them to make money. They want to get a break even on their first buy and a profit on their second buy. But if the market never gets back above the breakout point, the limit order bulls buying at lows and scaling in lower are losing money. When a channel is tight, by definition, the pullbacks are small, and that makes it very difficult to make money buying. If you look at this and you say, why, this is hard to make money as a bull, especially if you try to buy a couple times and you're losing money, that's telling you that you should only be selling. Instead of buying, every time you see a buy setup, you should look for where the bulls will get out and then sell exactly where the bulls are selling out of their lungs. Every trend is always forming wedge bottoms. Here we have a bear trend, one, two, three, tried to get a wedge bottom. Now we have another wedge bottom, one, two, three. That's normal. Every bear trend is always forming wedge bottoms. Every bull trend is always forming wedge tops. However, when the wedge bear channel is very tight, the target for a reversal up is the top of the channel, which is right here. So the market's reversing up from the bottom of the wedge, the target is right here. If it breaks strongly above that, then the next target is the beginning of the wedge up here, which is not very far up. In strong trends, in this case, strong bear trends, the bottoms all fail. And when a wedge channel is very tight, the odds are it's going to fail, not go up high enough for a profit, and instead the trend will keep working lower. Do not look to buy. You're always going to be seeing wedge bottoms and bear trends. Never look to buy a wedge bottom unless the swings are very, very big. Well, you can argue we are in a bear trend. We broke above the trend line, and now we have a lower low. And this is a lower low major trend reversal. Well, it might look like it, but it's not. Beginners are always seeing bottoms when trends are strong. Look to the left. If the pullbacks are small and the channel is very tight, these are not major reversals. They are minor reversals. And the best that you can hope to get is maybe a small trading range. It's too early to be buying. After you see a trading range, then trade it like a trading range. But until you get a big enough minor reversal for traders to convert the trend into a trading range, trade it only like what it is. And that's a tight bear trend. Only trade in the direction of the trend. Stop looking for reversals. The trend is too tight. You're going to lose money. This is not enough buying pressure for traders to be looking for a major trend reversal. The channel down is too tight for traders to be looking for a major trend reversal. Good looking buy signal bar. Failed breakout of a trading range. Reversal up from a wedge bottom. But it's a small pullback bear trend. That trumps any reason to look to buy. Failed breakout of a triangle. We have a wedge bottom. We have a good looking pull bar. But pullback only one bar. Pullback only one or two bars. Pullback only one or two bars. Pullback only one or two bars. This is not a buy setup. This is a small pullback bear trend. And the reversal here at best will be minor. And likely the bear trend will continue. Beginners love setups like this. They're always finding reasons to buy in strong trends. Because the risk is small. They buy above the high of this bar and they know their stop is just below. They're not going to lose very much. What they ignore is probability. The probability of making money with a stop in a very tight bear channel like this is small. So they lose most of the time. They can say well at least I only lost a little. But if you lose a little here and lose a little here and lose a little here. At the end of the day you'll have lost a lot. You cannot simply look at risk and say okay I'll take the buy. You got to look at reward. It's probably a minor reversal so the reward will be small. And probability. The probability of making money buying in a very tight bear channel is small. And therefore the traders equation is terrible for the bulls. So that's a good point. Again, you can't simply look at risk when you're taking a trade. You have to look at probability. Buying in a tight bear channel like this. Very low probability of making money. And you have to look at reward. A tight bear channel at best is going to be a bear flag or a trading range. And therefore the reward is small. And that is not enough reward despite the low risk to offset the very low probability of making money. Do not buy. Because the reversal will be minor and probably become a bear flag. Another lower high in the tight bear channel. And this is what happened. You got a little bull bar. You got a second bull bar. And you ended up losing money. Just like you did here and here and here and here all day long. You've been losing money. Not very much. You lost money here. You lost money here. You lose money all day long. Buying a small pullback bear trend. A trend in a very tight bear channel. You're taking this by. But look what just took place. You have six bars down. No bull bars. Maybe six bear bars. This might be a small bear body. Might be a doji. But in any case, you have six consecutive bear bars. That is unlikely to lead to a bull reversal. So you have a very tight channel nested within a bigger tight channel. The odds of getting a major reversal out of this are very small. Who buys up here? Well, the bears sell pullbacks and they buy for partial profits at a new low. So some bears will buy here. And then you have weak bulls constantly looking for reversals. And they're buying and losing money. When the bears see that the bulls are unable to get the reversal, the bears sell again. And they do that all day long. Every reversal attempt, they sell, they sell, they sell, they sell, they sell. And that's what you should be doing as well. Now, I said that a tight bear channel is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. I want to talk a little bit about that. Here's the five minute chart of the E-mini. And this is a 120 minute chart, a two hour chart of this same thing. While on the 15 minute chart, there might be an occasional pullback. There's not going to be much. And if you look at the 120 minute chart, it's just bear bar after bear bar. And you have four or five bear bars closing below their midpoints, near their lows. When you look at this, you say, wow, what a great looking buy. I'm going to buy here. I'm going to buy here. I'm going to buy here. Of course not. You're getting consecutive big bear bars. The odds are any reversal is going to be minor and fail. Therefore, anytime you have a tight bear channel, the higher timeframes will be in breakouts. And if you're in a strong bear breakout, you only want to sell. Therefore, on the five minute chart as well, you should only look to sell. This red box on the two hour chart is this red box on the five minute chart. And a tight bear channel is always a higher timeframe bear breakout. And you should trade it like a breakout and only look to sell. Channel is a very tight breakout on the two hour chart. Only sell. If you look at a chart and you're not sure, well, maybe we're getting enough buying pressure so that we'll get a reversal up. If you're not sure, look at a higher timeframe or simply decide that if you're in a bear trend and you're not sure if you should buy, do not buy. Whenever you're not sure about whether to buy in a bear trend, the answer is do not buy, only sell. Here's a breakout. There's no confusion. It's going lower. Here's a bear channel. It's constantly getting pullbacks and that generates confusion. It makes the shorts slightly lower probability. If you're trading this chart, there's no thought involved. You sell for any reason. You know the market's going lower. On this chart, there's a little bit less certainty. So the probability of the shorts is a little bit less. However, it's far better than the probability of the longs. It does not look like much of a trend, but it is a trend and the reward is big. If you find yourself repeatedly buying and losing money, take a look at the higher timeframe chart. And if you see two or three consecutive bear bars closing below their midpoints, closing near their lows, stop buying. If you want, you can trade the higher timeframe chart. For example, just sell closes, sell that close, sell this close. If you do, the correct stop is above the top of the current strong bear breakout, which is up here. And that's far. It's about 10 or 12 points up. If you can trade small enough, then it's reasonable to take the short. You might be able to get a tighter stop on a five minute chart. For example, after five or six bear bars, if you sell for any reason, you can put your stop above that high or above this high. When the market's in a tight bear channel, sometimes there'll be a pullback that's in a fairly tight bull channel. It's usually a bear flag. However, if it grows to 10 or 20 bars, you have to be watching for a possible strong bull breakout above that bear flag, which would convert the bear trend into a bull trend. Whenever you have a bear trend and you get a reversal, it's usually a pullback and it leads to a resumption of the bear trend. At some point in here, you're going to decide that the bear trend is in a fairly tight bear channel. Therefore, it's very difficult to make money buying and traders should only look to sell. You can call this a tight trading range. You can call it a slight wedge. Doesn't matter. It's a tight bull channel or a tight trading range. This is clearly a small tight bull channel lasting about four bars. There are pullbacks in a bear trend. The odds are the trend is going to resume and traders should only look to sell. For example, you can sell on the resumption of the bear trend. You can sell on a stop below the bear bar. Here we have a micro double top. You can sell below this doji or here. Now we have a micro double top. This is a higher probability sell. You place a stop order to go short one tick below the low of this bar and you get filled right here. Sometimes you'll get a bull channel in a bear trend and the bull channel just keeps growing. And at some point it can reach ten or more bars. You can call it a pullback that is endless. I call it an endless pullback. And it can often be the start of a bull trend or at least the end of the bear trend. If the bear trend has some kind of a climactic sell-off and if there's a strong reversal up, and then you start to get an endless pullback of ten or more bars, especially with big bull bars, it's probably not going to be a bear flag. It's probably either a bull leg in what would become a trading range or a very strong minor reversal that will lead to a major reversal, like a higher low major trend reversal and then a second leg up. The two things I look for are, was there some kind of a sell climax leading up to this bull channel? And did the bull channel have three or more consecutive bull bars closing above their midpoints, especially if two or more of the bars have pretty good sized bull bodies. And this is the case here. If I see this combination of things, three or more bull bars and some kind of a climax, here we've got a small parabolic wedge, I begin to think that this might be the beginning of an endless pullback. The channel down is tight and therefore this is not a major reversal. It's a minor reversal. However, it can be a minor reversal that could in fact become a major reversal into a bear trend. It could be an endless minor reversal, an endless pullback. And if I see some kind of a sell climax or parabolic wedge, and especially a reversal up that has three or more decent bull bars, traders start to think that instead of a resumption of the bear trend, instead of this tight bull channel being a bear flag, it could be the start of a bull trend. Initially, the probability still favors the bears. But once you start to get three or more decent bull bars, especially big bull bars, the odds are the bear trend has ended and the market has become either a trading range or a bull trend. Bulls are going to be looking to buy. For example, a second entry buy with a good bull bar, bull bar closing near its high, bull bar closing near its high. And then we've got three consecutive bull bars. Bulls will buy the close. We have a pullback, an II bull flag. Not much in terms of big bear bars. The odds are we're going higher. Traders will either buy on a stop above the II or on a stop above a strong bull bar, expecting to make at least some profit on a resumption of the trend up. I talk more about this on the videos on tight channels and micro channels, pullbacks and bar counting, and major trend reversals. Here we have a bull trend, but then look at this. We have a tight bear channel. If you have a tight bear channel and a bull trend, it's probably a bull flag, and it's more likely that you'll get trend resumption up than trend reversal down. If this grows to 20 or 30 bars, then the probability for the bears rises to about the same as for the bulls. But if the pullback is 5 or 10 bars, it's a pullback. A pullback means the trend is likely to resume, more likely than to reverse. And therefore, it's a minor reversal into a bull flag. We have a very tight bull channel here. And therefore, the best the bears will probably get is a minor reversal, which means either a bull flag or a trading range. Good breakout on the part of the bulls, breakout of this trading range. I would call a trading range like this that is small a pullback and a bull trend, and it's likely to have a bull breakout. Even though there's a tight bear channel, it's not enough bars to make the market always in short. And therefore, look to the left, it's still always in long, more likely that will go higher. The market's in a trading range. You can call it a triangle. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Lower high here. Slightly higher high, but basically a triangle. Higher lows. Modinally lower highs. In any case, we have consecutive bear bars. So at this point, it's probably always in short again. It was always in short, probably always in long, always in short, always in long. Triangles are always doing that. By the time you're always in short, it's going to reverse up and become always in long. By the time you're always in long, it's going to reverse down and become always in short. Anyway, we have a double top. Lower high after a reasonably strong leg down. And at the close of this bar, it's always in short again. The context is good for a swing down. You can call it a triangle or a trading range. Now we're getting a breakout and we have a double top. We have a pullback, but a bad buy signal bar here. And the pullback reversed into a bear bar. It looks like we might be in the early stages of converting into a bear channel. The trading range could continue all day. It was still a trading range at this point. It was also a bear channel. We were getting lower highs and lower lows. Very often a trend exists with a channel and you don't know which will ultimately win until many bars later. If we only look at this point from here to the left, it's still a trading range, but it's also still in a bear channel, an early bear channel. We have a bear breakout and we have a pullback, but the bulls were unable to get good looking bull bars. We're sideways. The bulls here did not do enough to make it always in long. And therefore you look to the left to find the last time there was clarity and that was here. So it's always in short here. And this is not enough to make it always in long. And therefore it's always in short. That means it's slightly higher probability to go down than to reverse up. When you're looking at this, you say, oh, it went up three or four bars sideways for a lot of bars. Went up here for about 10 bars from this low. Is it tight or broad? Well, if you can't tell, it's usually better to assume that it's tight and only trade in the direction of the trend. Trade it like a breakout. It's probably a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. And because it's a trend, you can swing part of your position. However, because it's mostly sideways for a lot of bars, a lot of the bears will simply scalp. Every time it goes up, they'll sell. And when it gets down near the prior low, they'll buy. And that causes these repeated pullbacks. For the bulls, I don't know that it's worth buying, especially after a big bear breakout like this and a follow through bar. Chances are whatever rally we get will be a lower high followed by another leg down. Again, decent looking bull bar, but following a six or seven bar bear micro channel and a bear breakout and a follow through bar. Probably a minor reversal to a lower high. The bulls have a double bottom, but a bear body. They have a bull II here, but pretty high up and not much buying pressure. So probably just part of a bear flag. Here we've got a failed breakout to a new low, but an extremely tight channel for about 15 bars. Plus the market's still always in short. Weak buy signal bar, don't buy. Now you can argue parabolic wedge, reversal close above the midpoint, but four consecutive bear bars. I would not take that buy. And then here, another bull bar. The bull's hoping for a higher low, major trend reversal, bear trend, bull breakout, higher low. A high two buy, high one, high two, good looking bull bar. Not enough bars for major reversal. We only went up four bars, probably a minor reversal, which means either a trading range or a bear flag. It turned out to be a one bar bear flag. The bears won. It's a double top bear flag. After you get a double top bear flag, you have a 40% chance of a swing down and the bears got it. And usually when it does start to turn down, it's always looking like it's going to reverse up and form a higher low. A head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. But 40% chance you're going to get a swing down. Getting lower highs. Pretty good sell off. Reversal not strong enough to make it always end long. And therefore bears will look for any reason to sell. Some bears will only scalp until it's clearly bearish. But some bears will swing part just in case it's a bear channel. If it is a bear channel, it could last a lot of bars. Now, it's a pretty tight bear channel. And some traders would also call this a small pullback bear trend, which is a very strong type of trend. A small pullback bear trend always looks like it's about to reverse into a bull trend. It looks like a bear leg in what would become a trading range. However, it tends to form gaps. The pullbacks are small. They do not go up very far. And that makes it very difficult to make money as a bull. You should only sell. So what do you think about this? We're down about 30 or 40 bars. Pullbacks are only a few bars tall. Very tight channel. And therefore, if we do get a reversal, it probably will only be minor. And followed by at least a test back down here. More likely a resumption of the bear trend. Whenever you look at a chart like this and you say, Gosh, it's going down, but gosh, it's really not strong enough for me to be selling at the low. I'll wait for a pullback. Whenever you have that anxious selling, that's your radar telling you that you have to get short. And therefore, just sell at the market. Look to the left. Find out where an appropriate stop is. Maybe above the top of the spare leg. And then just hold on. So, whenever you're desperately hoping for some kind of a pullback so that you can sell higher and have a tighter stop, that means the market's probably going a lot lower, and you should sell. and you should sell. A lot of times you'll have multiple choices for a stop. So if you sell here, do you put your stop here? Do you put your stop here? Do you put your stop here? Does it go up here? Well, I would not use a stop that's too tight. There are often several possibilities for a reasonable stop like above here, above here or above here. If you use a wider stop, less likely to get hit. So higher probability of making money. But when it does get hit, you'll lose more money. This is probably not reasonable stop, but this probably is. Whenever you're in a tight channel, it always feels like the market is constantly at the low. And therefore, if you wanna sell, you're always selling at the low. The market's always forcing you to sell too low. It always feels like the trend is not all that strong. Therefore, it can reverse at any time. But because the channel is very tight, any reversal is probably minor. And therefore the risk of a significant reversal, the risk of a loss is small. The easiest way to enter when you're feeling that way, when you're feeling like, oh my gosh, I need a pullback. I don't wanna sell at the low. The easiest thing to do is just sell at the market. Just trade a very small position and sell at the market. If you get a pullback, you can add to your position. If it goes straight down, you'll make a profit. When you have several choices for stops, and you're not sure which to use, I would tend to use one of the further ones. Certainly one of the middle stops. If you don't wanna risk all the way up here, and if you think this is too tight, then choose one of these stops. I personally would not choose this one. The break up to the downside is not strong enough to make this a major lower high. This is a more major lower high. So let's say you chose that stop. You put your stop above the high of the bear breakout. Let's say it goes above that stop. Well, if it goes above the stop and reverses down, you can always sell again. When a channel is very tight like this, a reversal into a bull trend is very unlikely. Usually the best the bulls can get is a trading range. And then once it's in a trading range, then they might be able to get a reversal. For example, a major trend reversal. But until then, traders can sell at any point for any reason, expecting that any reversal will be minor and that the odds are very high that the market will come back to their entry price. So for example, if you sold here or here, you got a bounce. It still went back below your entry price. If you sold here at the very low, it rallied against you for five or six bars, but the odds were high that it would come back to your entry price and probably go lower. Remember the market cycle. A tight channel is a very strong trend and therefore the risk of a reversal is small without first entering a trading range. And that means the risk of a reversal up here is small without the market first going sideways at least 10 or 20 bars. If it goes sideways 10 or 20 bars and you sold this low and then you concluded it was in a trading range, the odds are very high that you could get out break even, especially if you scale in higher. The odds of losing money are small. One of the key things is no matter where you sold or for whatever reason you sold, you have to rely on your stop as long as you believe it's still in a small pullback bear trend. The first reversal up has a very high probability of forming a lower high and testing back down. And that will allow you to exit with either a small profit or a small loss. The odds of losing much money when you're selling even at the absolute worst price at the very bottom are small. Still always in short, even with these bull bars, it's still always in short. And as I said, the best the bulls can reasonably hope to get in a very tight channel is either a trading range or a bear flag. Here they got two legs up, one pullback two, and therefore a low two bear flag. The market remained always in short. And the bulls will get out below a bear bar in a low two, one pullback two. If they make two attempts to go up and both fail, and then they see a bear bar for the low two sell signal bar, they'll sell below as low. And because the bulls will give up after two attempts to go up, the bears will sell there as well. And you'll probably get another leg down. In this particular day, the market stayed always in short all day. But that's not always the case. Very often when you have a very strong bear trend, in the final 30 minutes, the final hour, the bears will take profits and you can often get a sharp rally, a deep pullback. And therefore, when you get near the end of the day, if you see any kind of reversal, it's reasonable to take profits. Here we're going to second entry by at the low. So it's reasonable to get out here just in case this is the start of profit taking, which could go up to this high or even higher. We're starting to get dojis. We're probably not going much lower here. The market fell five or more points at the end of the day, but that's unusual. This is an extremely big day. And that's why the bears were able to make five points. Five points in this particular day is not big relative to the size of the day. And I think it's reasonable to get out here, a second entry by new low with only a half hour left to the day. Now we have a wedge late in the day. It never triggered and therefore the bears who did not get out here would not get out there. So it's okay to hold on to shorts. However, they would get out above a bull bar or a second entry by here at the end of the day. Can you sell at the bottom of a breakout? If this were a strong breakout, a series of consecutive big bear bars, you certainly would sell that. We have dojis here. We have a bear bar and then a doji. The bars are not all that big. So it's not as strong as a typical breakout. However, it's clearly always in short. Therefore, traders can sell at the close of this bar, taking a chance that we trend down. The probability of a profit is high. We have about 10 bars in a pretty tight bear micro channel with only a single bull bar. So the probability is we'll get at least a small second leg down. And therefore, the probability of making money is high. But so is the risk. We have a bear breakout, another bear breakout, and the stop is up here. So yes, the probability is high, but so is the risk. Let's say you sell at the bottom of a channel. The probability of a profit is not quite as high. And usually the risk is not as high as well because the leg down is not as strong or big as in a breakout. And therefore, the stop is usually not quite as far as it is in a breakout. This breakout is not terribly dramatic, but a lot of breakouts are extremely big. And the stop can be very far away. Here, we have less probability of making money selling down here compared to here. This is a breakout even though it's not strong. It's slightly higher probability to make money than down here. But the risk is a little bit less. This is really not a good example to illustrate my point. If I had a chart where there was a very, very strong bear breakout, the stop would be very far and the probability of making money would be very big. Here's a breakout, but not very big. However, the risk is further than selling in a bear channel. And the probability of making money is greater. I gave my definition of what a tight bear channel is. And if the market's in a tight bear channel, it's very difficult to make money buying. You should only look to sell. A tight bear channel is a strong breakout, a bear breakout on a higher timeframe chart. And again, you should only be selling when the market's in a breakout. Most of the time you'll get small, tight bull channels within the tight bear channel, the bear trend, and their bear flags. However, if you get an endless pullback, if the market pulls back five bars and then 10 bars or 15 or 20 bars, instead of it being a bear flag, it might be the start of a bull trend. You have to be watching for a series of consecutive bull bars and especially a strong bear breakout with follow through before you decide that you're getting a bull breakout above the bear flag and that the market is turning into a bull trend. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading tight bear channels. This is the first one from last three days. This is a event, which she has sent an entireoshi. It has to be appreciated of the man's approach. You stay tuned in. This was Meik. I'm Matt Metro Botts dripping out of the man that tells Jim Dubas back to the ladenach.