 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of six videos on channels. I'm going to begin by talking about different types of channels. I'll move on to discuss tight and broad bull channels. And then finally I'll talk about tight and broad bear channels. A channel is simply an area of the chart that can be contained between two lines. And that includes a trading range. A trading range is simply a horizontal channel. You can draw a line across the top and a line across the bottom. And in this video I'm going to be talking about channels that are in trends, like a bull trend or a bear trend. In a bull trend I draw a trend line along the bottom. And then the line across the top is the trend channel line. In this case I have it drawn as a parallel. As I said, if you have an area on the chart that can be contained between two lines and that area is horizontal, it's a trading range, but it's still a channel. Sometimes patterns are not all that obvious. For example, here there's a small expanding triangle. I have it drawn here using this high. It probably began with this high. So up here. We went down and up on that bar. And then down here. And then up here. To there. And then down and up. But it's still a type of channel. It's contained between two lines. In an expanding triangle, the lines are diverging. They're getting further apart. Other times triangles are converging. Here we went down and up and down and up and down. I know that if you use this high and that high to draw the top, the second point is above. But anytime I have a trading range and the lines are pretty much convergent, I think of it as a triangle. It doesn't matter if you call it a triangle or simply a trading range. You can call it a diamond pattern, which is an old fashioned type of reversal pattern. It doesn't matter. You know that the market is sideways after a bull trend. It's in breakout mode. And it may resume up. It may reverse down. And when the chart starts to get into a convergent channel, that means the market is probably fairly close to breaking out. Again, there are triangles on this chart as well. Whenever I see a trading range and I can draw lines that are convergent, I think of it as a triangle. There's a triangle up here as well. Three pushes up. One down, two down, three. And if you have a diagonal channel, a trend channel, but it's convergent, I think of it as a wedge. So we've got three pushes down. One, two, three. And that allows me to draw a line. And then I can draw a bare trend line on top. A wedge bottom. A wedge bottom. What's your plan? Patterns are rarely perfect. And you have to be flexible. When I started out 30 years ago, I would look at books and magazines and the patterns were all perfect. If you look for perfect patterns when you trade, you're never going to trade because perfect patterns are rare. They are the exception. Most patterns are not perfect, but the computers see them, so you have to be able to see them as well. A trading range, you have to be thinking about a breakout, and I'm always looking at lines, and you can see you can draw a conversion lines. So this is a triangle after a rally, and it turned out to be a part of a double top, and it led to a bear breakout. I'm always looking at reversals, and they allow me to draw a line. So we have a reversal up, another reversal up, I can draw a line, and then see what the market does when it gets down to the line. It reversed up again, and you can see I can draw a line across this reversal down, and this reversal down, a wedge bottom, and we got a strong breakout to the upside. A bull breakout or a spike, and then a pullback, and a channel. So it's a spike in channel, bull trend. A tight channel, but it's still a bull trend channel. Another trading range, three pushes down, one, two, three. Possibly a triangle, three pushes up, one, two, three. I know you're saying, well, Al, it's not a good push up. It didn't even go above the high of that bar. On a smaller timeframe chart, that is a small rally, and then a sell-off, a rally, sell-off, rally, sell-off. So this is an expanding triangle. Again, it doesn't matter if you call it an expanding triangle. It doesn't matter if you call it a head and shoulders top. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. The market's in breakout mode. Head and shoulders top, instead of breaking to the downside, we broke to the upside. Not perfect, but a trading range. It looks like this is a reasonable top to the range. We turn down, we turn down, we turn down, we turn down, we turn down. We tried to break to the upside, it turned down. And this is a possible bottom to the range. Every head and shoulders top is a trading range. And here, the neckline is the bottom of the range. And this is a horizontal channel. It's a trading range. I'm going to talk now about bull channels, both tight and broad. Every trend is in a channel at some point. And every chart has channels on it. We have a breakout here. It continued here. On a higher timeframe chart, this is simply one or two or three big bull trend bars. It's a breakout. No pullbacks. It's a micro channel. And then here, we have a bull channel. But the pullbacks are small. They're only lasting two bars here, one bar here, three bars here. And they're not dropping very far. This is a very tight bull channel. On a higher timeframe chart, that tight bull channel is a breakout. And because it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart, it's better only to look to buy. Tight bull channel. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. Better only to look to buy. For any reason, blow bars, reversals up, doesn't matter. And bears should not sell. Even if they sell with limit orders at the highs of bars, the market rarely pulls back far enough for them to make even a scalp. Here, if you sell this high, you lose money. Tight bull channel. Better only to look to buy. Again, a tight channel. It's a breakout on a higher timeframe. So, only trade in the direction of the trend. There are pullbacks. This bar fell below that low. These bars fell below that low. So, it's a channel instead of a breakout on this timeframe. But the bears are only in control briefly here for one bar. Here, they couldn't even get a pullback. They just got to pause. When you look at this chart, you'll say, well, the market's going up. Yes, it's going up. But how is it going up? Is it a breakout? Well, there's a breakout here. But this is not a breakout. This is a trading range. There's a breakout here. But there's a reversal here. And there's a big gap down here. Yet, it starts in the lower left, ends in the upper right. It's a bull trend. It's a broad bull channel. And with broad bull channels, they often have times when the market is always in short. Maybe it's always in short here. Maybe it's always in short here. The market fell below a major higher low. This higher low broke strongly to a new high. Yet, we fell below it. However, we're still above this low, the bottom of the bull trend. Broad bull channels often have times when the market is actually always in short, but still within the broad bull channel. And when a channel is broad like this, it's always good to trade in the direction of the trend. So, it's always good to be buying. But when the reversals are as deep as they are here, as they are in broad bull channels, bears will sell, knowing that the market will fall far enough for a profit. A broad bull channel is similar to a trading range that simply sloped upward. Bulls can buy for swings and for scalps. Bears, it's usually better only to sell for scalps until you're confident that the market is in a bear trend. As I said, sometimes the sell-offs are strong enough to make the market always in short, but still within a broad bull channel. That's one of the hallmarks of a broad bull channel. The market often has episodes when the market is temporarily always in short. We reversed up here, so I'll redraw the channel using this low. As channels progress, they tend to become flatter and broader. The original channel was across here, but we gapped below it. And now I would redraw the line there. We fell below this low, and I think this is a major higher low, as is this. But we did not fall below the bottom of the bull breakout. And this sell-off then, while it makes the market always in short, at least temporarily, it still does not convert the market into a bear trend yet. We're still above this higher low. The big picture at this point, the big picture is we're still forming a potential higher low after a higher high. And at this point, you got to be thinking, yes, we're in a trading range. We're in an early bear trend, but the bull channel still is alive. Is this really a minor higher low? You can call it a minor higher low because this is a much stronger higher low. But I would call it a major higher low. With this many bars up and the breakout to a new high, I think this is a major higher low. And we're also in a trading range. And in a trading range, the market often falls below the bottom of the range before reversing up. The important point is that when the market's in a broad bull channel, it can be very bearish at times. But those times do not last long before the bull trend reasserts itself. A broad bull channel, I think of as a weak bull trend. It's barely better than a trading range. And during a lot of the time, it's in a trading range like here and here. The flatter and the broader the channel is, the easier it is for bears to make money. When the market's in a broad channel like this, bulls and bears will place trades. It's okay to both buy and to sell. If the channel is very tight, you only want to look to buy. But when it's broad like this, traders will both buy and sell. As I said, one of the other characteristics of a broad channel is that it spends a lot of time sideways in a trading range. And traders trade it like a trading range. They buy and sell because most of the bars on this chart, even though we're in a broad bull channel, most of the bars are also in a trading range. Trading range, buy low, sell high, and scalp. The lines are far apart, so there's plenty of room for both the bulls and the bears to make money. Another characteristic of a broad bull channel is that a lot of the bars have tails on top and a lot of the bars have bare bodies. And that's consistent with the market being very two-sided. Many bars overlap, lots of reversals, a lot of bad follow through after good bull bars. Good bull bar, bad follow through. A few good bull bars, bad follow through. Bull reversal, bad follow through. Bull breakout, bad follow through. When you see bull legs that have bad follow through, the market's either in a trading range or in a broad bull channel. Pullbacks are very obvious. They last many bars and they fall for a lot of points, often more than 50% of the prior bull leg. It simply looks like a trading range that is tilted up. And because of that, traders trade it like a trading range. They buy low, sell high, and scalp. This is a bare channel and it's tight. The pullbacks are brief, only lasting a few bars, and they do not go up very far. On a high enough timeframe chart, a tight channel like this is simply a breakout. This is a five minute chart. Here's a 60 minute chart. And it's a breakout. And because it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart, when you're trading the five minute chart, it's much easier to make money only selling. So it's better only to sell and not buy. If you buy, even with the limit order, look at this. You buy that low right here, you're going to lose money. The market never comes back above that low. Same here. Buying a new low, you lose money. This is a bull channel and it's very tight. Pullbacks are brief, do not fall many bars. Very difficult for bears to make money even with limit orders. On a higher timeframe chart, a tight bull channel like that is going to be a breakout. Five minute chart, tight channel. Fifteen minute chart, it's a breakout. And because it's a breakout on the next higher timeframe chart, it's better only to look to buy on the five minute chart. What do you think about this channel? Is it broad enough to sell for scalps? This is the Euro versus the Japanese Yen. Or should you only look to buy? A general rule, if you cannot decide if the channel is broad enough to sell, only look to buy. When you have a bull channel, it's always good to buy. And you can only sell if it's clearly broad enough to make money fairly easily. In a situation like this, where the pullbacks are only 10 or 15 pips, it's very difficult to make money selling. It's better only to look to buy. I'm going to talk now about bare channels, both tight and broad. Every channel is a trend, and every trend eventually has a channel. And every chart has many channels in it. The tighter the channel, the stronger the trend. And it's similar to a breakout. When you have a fairly tight channel like this, the pullbacks usually only last one, two or three bars. And they usually do not retrace too much of the prior bare leg. You should only be looking to sell. Here, a tight bare channel. Pullback went up three bars or so. But really, very difficult to make money buying when the pullbacks are relatively small like this and the channel is so tight. Better only to look to sell. This is a bare breakout, especially this strong bare breakout. But here, this bar goes above this high. This bar goes above this high. So this is a pullback. That's a pullback. That means that the market has evolved from a breakout phase, this whole thing is a breakout, into a channel phase. But the bulls are in control only briefly and intermittently. The bears keep reasserting themselves and we keep getting lower lows and lower highs. Take a look at this chart. It's a 120 minute chart. Dollar versus the Yen. And what do you think about this chart compared to the last chart? It's a broad bare channel. The pullbacks last many bars and they retrace much of the prior bare leg. It basically looks like a trading range that's sloped slightly down. And a lot of the chart is, in fact, in a trading range. Bulls can buy for scalps. They can buy reversals up. They can buy prior lows and look for scalps. It's a bare channel, so it's a bare trend. Bears will definitely sell as well. They'll sell for swings or for scalps. Again, all channels are trends. All bare channels are bare trends. And the broader the channel is, the weaker it is and the more it's similar to a trading range. Another characteristic of a broad bare channel, the reversals up are often strong enough to make the trend always in long. Here, here, here. However, as strong as the rallies are, they're still largely making lower highs. This rally went above that high, but not above the top of the strong bare breakout. And the reversals down led to new lows. So, it's predominantly lower highs and lower lows, even though there's a lot of overlap, even though the market is often always in long. And even though it does go above some of the prior lower highs. It's still mostly lower highs and lower lows. Major lower high, even though it did not go to a new low. Another major lower high, strong bare reversal down. It did go to a new low. This is, I think, a fairly minor lower high. Even though this low might be a little bit below that low, the sell-off is not all that strong. It's still significant that the rally went above it. And the market probably was always in long somewhere in here, but only briefly. And it turned back down below a more significant lower high. You look at that and you say, well, that's confusing, Ali. It's not convincing. Well, that's the point. When the market's in a broad, bare channel, it has a lot of trading range price action. Yet, when you step back from across the room and look at the chart, the market is trending down. It's making occasional lower lows. The market's getting lower lows and lower highs. It's basically a trading range that's sloped down. And because of that trading range price action, traders can make money both buying and selling. Broad swings means a weaker trend. And it means it's much more two-sided. The broader and flatter the channel is, the easier it is to make money buying even though it's a bear trend. So traders will both buy and sell when you have a broad channel, especially when it's flat like this. When the channel is reasonably tight and you're not sure if you should both buy and sell, it's better to only trade in the direction of the trend. If you have a tight, bare channel, it's better only to sell. This is broad. You can trade both ways. The lines are far apart. The rallies have a lot of bars, five or ten bars. And there are lots of swings up and down. Traders can both buy and sell. Another characteristic of a broad bare channel, a lot of the time the market's in a trading range. So it's in a trading range here, a little bit lower, still a trading range here. And because broad channels spend a lot of time in trading ranges, you can trade them like trading ranges. Look to buy low, sell high and scalp. Bear trend, but a lot of the bars have prominent tails on the bottom. Also, a lot of the bars have bull bodies and strong bull bodies. That's another characteristic of a broad bare channel. It's a weak bear trend. Traders will both buy and sell. A lot of overlapping bars. The market's not going down, even though it's overall going down on the screen. Much of the time it's sideways, overlapping bars. Weak follow through after big bear bars. Big bear bar, bad follow through. Bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, bull bar. Bear bar, doji. So a sell off, but there are problems with the sell off. Where are the consecutive big bear trend bars that you typically see in a strong bear trend? They're not present because this is not a strong bear trend. It has a lot of two-sided trading. Obvious pullbacks. Bear trend, but pullback very strong. In fact, it's a swing up. Again, it looks like a trading range that's tilted slightly down. Compare that with this. We got a bear micro channel, a breakout. And then we're starting to get pullbacks here and here. It's a bear channel. Is it broad enough to both buy and sell? Or should you only sell? If you cannot decide, then assume that it's too tight to buy and only sell. Here's a 240-minute chart of the dollar versus the yen. Most trends begin with a breakout. Here it's a fairly good sized breakout. Then we got a pullback. At this point, it's still below this high. So it still might be the earliest stages of a broad bear channel. But it's clearly enough of big down, big up to create confusion. It turned out it formed a lower high. And then a persistent channel down. New low. Big pullback. So at this point, you got to be thinking it might be a broad bear channel or a trading range. And it is both at this point. We have a spike down and then a broad channel. Spike and channel patterns, like all patterns, are often nested. And by nested, I mean there are often smaller patterns within the bigger pattern. Bear trend. There are a lot of breakouts along the way. There's another bear breakout here and then here and then here. Each leg up or down often contains smaller breakouts. And some of the best trends are seen on the smaller timeframe charts. To me, this is a nested spike and channel trend. We got a spike here and a channel. You can say this is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. So it's also a spike, pullback and then channel. Bear spike, pullback and channel. Fairly tighter channel within this broader channel. Bear spike, pullback, channel. Bear spike, pullback, channel. There are several nested spike and channel patterns here. Bear breakout. So small spike and channel. Bear breakout. On a smaller timeframe chart, this would be obviously a spike and channel bear trend. Very common to see nested patterns. Smaller patterns within larger patterns. Another bear breakout and then a little wedge channel. So another spike and channel trend. Again, within this larger spike and channel bear trend. We have a breakout. Bear breakout. And then a channel. Breakout. You can call it a trend bar. You can call it a spike. And then pullback. Pullback starts the channel phase. So a spike and channel bear trend. When you have a spike and channel bear trend. So spike and pullback and channel. It's usually followed by a trading range. And at least half of the time, the top of the range is at the start of the channel. That is the target now for a rally. If we do get a rally here. A channel. You can call it a bullback. A channel, bad follow through, strong bear bar, good bull bar, bear bar, bull bar, bear bar, bull bar. It looks like a bear leg in a trading range instead of a bear leg in what will continue down as a trend. And that's usually the case. When you see a channel and it has bad follow through along the way, it's probably going to transition into a trading range before long. And once it's in a trading range, you have to be thinking that we could get trend resumption down or trend reversal up. We can get a trend breakout in either direction. I think of a channel as a transition phase, a hybrid. It has characteristics of a trend and characteristics of a trading range. And it's usually part of the transition from a trend into a trading range. We have a strong bear breakout, so a very strong bear trend. And then we have a channel with bad follow through all the way down. On some higher time frame chart, it's tight enough to be possibly a breakout. But on this chart, bad follow through, bad follow through, bad follow through, bad follow through. It's probably in the process of transitioning into a trading range. And then we have a bull breakout above the channel. And we're probably in the early stages of a trading range. In this video, I talked about the different types of channels. They can be horizontal, like a trading range. They can be expanding or contracting, like a triangle. Or they could be rising or falling diagonally, like a bull trend or a bear trend. I then talked about tight and broad bull channels. And finally, I talked about tight and broad bear channels. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fourth of six videos on channels.