 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on tight channels and micro channels. I'm going to begin by talking about tight trading ranges and then I'll talk about breakouts and climaxes. When you look at this chart, you can see the market was in a bear trend and then a trading range and then the bear trend results. However, the height of this trading range is only 9 ticks tall. That's often enough room to scalp with limit orders, but not when the average bar is only 6 ticks tall. If the smallest scalp in the E-mini is one point, which it is, you should not trade when the market looks like this. You should not trade even with limit orders. It's too difficult to make money, too easy to lose money, and it's too easy for the losses to be bigger than the wins. My general rule is if you're going to trade, you want the range to be at least 2 to 3 times taller than the smallest scalp, and 2 to 3 times the height of the average bar. The smallest scalp in the E-mini is one point, so you want the range to be at least 2 to 3 points tall. And if the average bar is 6 ticks tall, you want the height of the trading range to be at least 12 to 18 ticks tall, which it's not here. So traders should not trade when the market looks like that. We have a bear breakout of a triangle and a follow-through bar. The market looks like it's changing, and it looks like the bear trend is resuming. So bear trend, trading range, you can call it a triangle beginning all the way back here. We're getting higher lows, and we're getting lower highs, and we're getting a breakout with good follow-through. This closes below the low of the past 20 bars or so, closing near its low, and we have consecutive big bear bars. Odds are this is the beginning of trend resumption down. Here's a 5-minute chart of the Euro market, and you can see we're sideways here. In fact, we're sideways all the way here. And then we get a bull breakout and a second leg up. Take a look at the height of this range. The range lasted about 5 hours, and the height of the range, top to bottom, was only 14 pips. The average bar was only about 3 pips tall for about 5 hours. When that's the case, you should not take a trade. In the Forex markets, the smallest scalp is 10 pips. And when the range is this tight, you should not trade even with limit orders, because you will not make money. My general rule is, I want the height of the range to be at least 2 to 3 times bigger than the range. And I want the height of the range to be at least 2 to 3 times taller than the height of the average bar. Here, the average bar is maybe 3 or so pips tall. Here, maybe 4 or 5 pips tall. The entire range is only 14 pips. That is barely 2 to 3 times the height of the average bar. But I also want the height of the range to be at least 2 to 3 times bigger than the smallest scalp. The smallest scalp is 10 pips. I need the range to be at least 20 to 30 pips tall to scalp even with limit orders. Otherwise, do not trade. Too easy to lose money. We got a breakout here. A bear breakout here. Follow through here. This close is above the high of the past 20 or 30 bars. Maybe the high of the past 50 bars. And then we have a bull body for follow through. Either buy this close, buy the close of the follow through bar, or even buy the low of this bar with the limit order. Expecting the start of some kind of a trend up. Strong bull breakout. Bars closing on their highs. Bears are giving up. Bulls are buying closes. It's a buy the close bull trend. You have to buy. Here we have a micro channel. We have a bar. Another bar that did not trade below its low. Another bar that did not trade below its low. Another bar that did not trade below the low of the prior bar. So this is a 4 bar bull micro channel. This bar traded below the low of that bar. So this is the end of the bull micro channel. A micro channel can be simply 2 bars. It can be 10 bars. It can be 50 bars. This one is a 4 bar bull micro channel. Once you get a pullback, it's no longer a micro channel. It's still a tight channel. Which is still a sign of strong bulls. Chances are the first reversal down will be followed by another leg up. But now I'm going to be talking specifically about micro trend lines and micro channels. When you have a micro channel like this and you're starting to draw a trend line connecting the lows of this bar with that bar. That's horizontal. Or this bar or this bar and then this bar or that bar. It's a very tight channel. Most of the bars touch the line. Most of the bars are close to the line. And the bars are often very small as they are here. Here we have 2 bars without a pullback. 3, 4, 5, 6 bars. This is a 6 bar bare micro channel. No high went above the high of the prior bar until this bar. That ended the micro channel. It's about a 50% pullback. Not quite. It's a bull flag. Two legs down. One. And then bull bar. And then two. Traders will buy on the resumption up. Here we have 2 bars, 3 bars, 4 bars without a pullback. And we finally break above the trend line here. So, this is a 4 bar bare Micro channel. And then here another bare Micro channel. We have a break out above the high of that bar. So, that ends that Micro channel. And then a 3 bar Micro Channel. And then here about a 10 bar Micro Channel. And here a 4 bar Micro channel. This bar going above the high of the prior bar is the channel. 3 bar Micro channel. 4 bar Micro Channel. And 4 bar Micro Channel. So, lots of Micro Channels. Most of the bars touch the trend line or are close to the trend line. The bars usually are small, but sometimes they can be relatively big, like here. And here are a number of bull microchannels. So four bars up and then a pullback. That ends that channel. And then we've got another four bar bull microchannel here. Here we have about a seven or eight bar bull microchannel. The purpose for drawing lines like this is it highlights strong legs, whether the market's in a trading range, a bull flag, a bear flag, or a strong trend. It's a channel and therefore it's a trend. It's a small trend. Even this, a two bar sell off, you can call it a two bar bear microchannel or two bar bear trend, but it's not as big or strong as the bull trend that preceded it. So it was a two bar bull flag. When you have a bull microchannel like this and the bull bars are fairly strong, closing on the high, closing on the high, big bull body, a break above a bear channel, you can call it a wedge bottom. Traders will look to buy the first reversal down. They can buy with a limit order at the low of that bar. Or they can buy with a stop above the high of this bar, expecting at least one more small leg up. Bear microchannel. Good looking bear bars here and here. Bears will sell the first reversal up, expecting at least a little bit more down. They can sell with a limit order above the high of that bar, or with a stop order below this bar or that bar. Microchannel, you need two lines. I typically only draw one. A lot of times if the microchannel is just a few bars, I don't draw a line at all. I just have it in my head. I'm just aware of the microchannel. We're in a bear trend, so we have a micro trend line, a bear trend line that only covers a few bars, two to 10 bars. The market's in a bear channel, so you can always draw a second line here. You would draw it there. You can call it a wedge if you want. It's a channel that is converging. The lines are getting closer together. Here we have a bull trend, bull trend line below, and a bull trend channel line above. The channel line really adds nothing to what you're seeing, and you don't have to draw it. I virtually never draw it. I'm only interested in the trend line. Bear trend, so bear trend line. Bull trend, so bull trend line. The first reversal down below a pretty strong bull trend. Probably buyers below, so I'm looking to buy. Even this pretty strong bull trend, first reversal down, bulls will probably buy. But the correct stop is below the bottom of the bull breakout or the bottom of the bull trend. And you can see that if you bought that low and used the correct stop, you would have gotten out break even. Or you could have bought more above a bull bar here or over here. You'd make money on the second buy and get out break even on the first buy. So, one, two, three, four, five, six bars without a pullback. We finally have a pullback. So, it's a six bar bull micro channel. And it has a couple pretty strong bull bars. Chances are traders will buy the first reversal down. And this becomes a bull flag. Three pushes down. One, two, and then three. This is a five minute E-mini strong bull breakout. And a bull micro channel. The bull channel has six bars before having a pullback. Bull trend line. Bulls will buy the low of that bar. Meaning that the bear reversal attempt will fail and the market will go up at least enough to make a scalp. Once you see a strong micro channel beginning, a lot of traders will flip to a smaller time frame chart like a one minute chart or a two minute chart. You might find an earlier entry on a smaller time frame chart. Most traders who are starting out should not be doing that. This is the one minute chart of exactly this chart. This blue box is exactly this blue box. One minute chart, five minute chart. One minute chart, five times more bars. This is the five minute entry. And if you're looking at the one minute chart, this is where you'd get filled if you took the entry on the five minute chart. However, on the one minute chart, there's also a bull micro channel. We have seven bars here without a pullback and pretty good looking bull bars. So some traders will buy below the low of this bar, betting the bear reversal will fail. Others will buy on a stop above the high of this bar. That would be an example. They would enter there on the reversal attempt below the bull trend line, betting that the reversal attempt will fail. The entry price on the five minute chart is 2098.75, which is right there. This is the five minute entry. If you instead entered on the one minute chart, you entered here on the first attempt to reverse down or on the resumption up from this bull flag. The entry price on the one minute chart right here is 2097.25. It's six ticks less than the entry on the five minute chart. Here we have a six bar bear micro channel. This is the first reversal up above the high of the prior bar. So that is a breakout above the bear micro channel, the bear trend line. Bulls can sell at the high of this bar. They get filled over here or they could sell on the resumption down. This becomes a bear flag and they sell the breakout below the bear flag and they get filled here just below the low of that bar. They bet the bulls will fail. They can look at a smaller timeframe chart to see if they can find an earlier entry. This is a one minute chart of that. This blue box on the five minute chart. This is the same bars on the one minute chart. There are five times more bars. Here's where the bears sold on the five minute chart. And this is that entry. If you look at the one minute chart, this is exactly when you would have gotten short. However, you could look at the one minute chart and say, huh, pretty good bear micro channel here falling about six bars with a couple of good bull bars. Why not simply sell at the high of this bar, betting that the bull reversal will fail. That is okay to do. Here the sell on the five minute chart was at 1.1304. And the one minute traders sold right here. And they sold four pips better than the ones that took the five minute entry over here. Again, most traders should not do this. They should simply stick with one timeframe. However, if you're able to do it and you're able to make quick decisions and you're eager to get in, one way to get in is to look at the one minute chart. So if this is falling and you're saying, gosh, I really, I'm hoping for a pullback so I can sell at the high of the prior bar. You can put up a one minute chart and see if there's a micro channel on that chart as well. And then sell at the higher bar on the one minute chart, instead of waiting for the pullback on the five minute chart. We have a strong rally here. We have six bars closing near their highs and a very big bull bar here. So a six bar bull micro channel. The bears are attempting to reverse, but when a trend is this strong and you have a breakout this big, the odds are there'll be at least a little bit more up. Because of that bulls will buy at the low of this bar, betting that the bear reversal will fail. Remember, bulls were buying at the high of all of these bars. So they're buying at the close of all of these bars. Certainly above the low of the prior bar. Now they're finally getting a chance to buy at the low of the prior bar. A lot of bulls will take it and they'll get filled right there. When you have a strong trend like this, you should not be thinking about selling. You're not going to make money. The best the bears can hope to see after a strong breakout like this is a trading range. And here the trading range just lasted a couple of bars. You're not going to make money selling. Here we have about seven consecutive bear bars and maybe a nine bar bear micro channel. Is this reversal up going to be successful? Probably not. Most of these bear bars closed at or near their lows and certainly below their midpoints. That's a sign of good selling pressure. And even with a good bull bar like this, the odds are the bull reversal will be minor and that there'll be more sellers at the high of that bar. Because of that, traders as this market's going down will place limit orders to sell at the high of the prior bar. Did not get filled. Did not get filled. Finally, they got filled. Looking for at least a small second leg down. Strong bear trend. Do not look to buy. The best the bulls can hope for is maybe a trading range, which they got over here. And you're not going to make money even with limit orders when the range is that tight. Only sell. We have a bull trend, a wedge bull trend. Bull bar, bear, bull, bear, bull, bear. So three pushes up, three reversals down. And then we have four consecutive bear bars closing on their lows with decent sized bear bodies. This is a breakout. And it's early in a trend. It's more likely to lead to a measured move down than it is to be an exhaustion gap followed by a reversal back up. And we have a breakout here and then a pullback here and here did not close the gap. The gap between these highs and that low. Therefore we might get a measured move down based upon the height of this strong bear breakout. This is the measured move. And look what happened when we got down to that measured move target. Lots of gaps. Gaps between the low of this bar and the close of this bar. The close of that bar. The close of this bar. The close of this bar. So at this point the gap is this close and that low. And at this point the gap is this high and that low. Or this high and that low. And the gaps did not close. The gap between this close and that low. Or this low. Lots of gaps in here. The bulls tried to reverse and close those gaps. Could not. And then we started to go down. So you have to assume that this series of gaps will result in a measured move down. And this breakout will be a measuring gap. I call it a gap even though there are many different ways to draw the gaps. You can simply call it a strong breakout. You can call this the gap. Pullback breakout point. Probably a measuring gap here for a measured move down. A similar strong bear breakout. Here about eight bars down. Several closing on their lows. But it's occurring 20 or more bars into a trend. When you have a bear breakout, 20 or more bars into the trend. And that breakout is the strongest that the bear trend has been. The odds are that it's going to be an exhaustion gap rather than a measuring gap. It can be a measuring gap. But a strong bear breakout late in a bear trend. More likely a sign of exhaustion. And usually followed by a trading range instead of a measured move down. A micro channel. It's a breakout. On a higher time frame chart it certainly is a breakout. Gap. You can say the close of this bar with the low of that bar. The close of this bar with any of these lows. The close of this bar with the low of that bar. The beginning of the micro channel. The close of this bar and that low. Those are all different ways to look at this in terms of a gap. All of those little gaps eventually closed. And at some point when it gets above this low. Traders will start calling this an exhaustive move. When it gets all the way back here. Where the bulls first began to buy at the low of the prior bar. You can say that the whole thing is an exhaustive move. Especially once you get above the high of the bar. This is a major lower high. A lower high that led to a strong breakout and a new low. Once the market gets above it. The argument that this is a bear trend is over. The market then is either in a trading range or in a bull trend. I'm going to talk a little bit now about whether a breakout is the start of a move. Or a climactic end of a move. Here we have no pullbacks. This low is above that low. And that continued on for about 10 bars or so. So it's a micro channel. Here we have a lot of bars in the micro channel. A lot of the bars are very big. Closing on their highs. With not much overlap between the bars. Is this more likely to be an exhaustive end of a bull trend? Or is it more likely to be a breakout that leads to a measured move? If you have a lot of bars and big bars. The buy climax is more extreme. Remember every bull trend bar is a breakout. Every bull trend bar is a climax. Every series of bull trend bars is a breakout. Every series of bull trend bars is a climax. I view this pair of bars as a buy climax. Then we have a pause. Then we have another buy climax here. And then a pause. And then another buy climax up here. So it's a series of consecutive buy climaxes without a pullback. More likely you'll get exhausted bulls. And you'll get a pullback that lasts more bars. Typically I look for a pullback lasting about 10 bars and having at least two legs. And the pullback can be sideways or down. Here, two legs sideways. One, pullback, two. So we have a two legged pullback. It became a triangle. 11 bar bull micro channel. Consecutive buy climaxes. One, two, and three. Many big bars. Expect at least 10 bars, two legs, sideways to down and a pullback. So this would be the minimum that traders would expect. It's an exhaustive buy climax. We have a bull micro channel here lasting about eight or nine bars. All good bars. Many closing on their highs. Most closing above their mid points. And this is a breakout. Every bull bar, every series of bull bars is a breakout. Now we have a bear micro channel with five bars without a pullback. This bar went above the high of that bar. So this is the end of the bear micro channel. It's two legs down. One, pullback, two. Around a 50% correction of the bull trend. It's a bull flag. It's also a bear trend. But what's more likely? Is it going to be a bear trend that continues down indefinitely? Or are we going to get trend resumption up? Most reversal attempts fail. And the bears are trying to reverse this bull trend. Probably will fail. The bulls are trying to reverse this bear trend. Probably will fail as well. So we may go sideways here. Which is stronger? This or that? This clearly is stronger. This looks like a two-legged pullback in the bull trend. And look at this bear bar and the follow through bar. Bad follow through. We have a pair of bear bars. Bad follow through. Bear bar. Bad follow through. Bull bar. Good follow through. Good follow through. Good follow through. So a much stronger rally than the sell off. This bear breakout probably is a bull flag and not the start of a bear trend. Again, a five bar bear micro channel. Pretty strong. First reversal up might not get far. So we might get a second leg down. However, this is still probably a pullback in this bull trend and not the start of a bear trend. If you buy, you have to allow for the possibility of at least a little bit more down after a five bar bear micro channel. So as you stop here, I don't think so. I think your stop is either below the bottom of the buy climax or down here below the bottom of the bull trend. In general, buying above a bear bar even in a bull flag is not a good bet. You can see we tried to get another leg down. Had you put your stop below this bull bar, you would have been stopped out. Had you used an appropriate stop down here or here, you would have been successful. Had you been stopped out by the market going below this bar, if your stop was there, you'd buy again above this bull bar and you would have caught that swing up. Second entry buy. So if you did not buy above this bear bar, you could buy above this bar. It would be a higher probability buy. We have a bull breakout above a bear micro channel. A new low and resumption up. On a smaller timeframe chart, this would actually be a lower low major trend reversal. Let's say this is a five minute chart. If you looked at a one minute chart, you'd see a bear trend, a bull breakout, and then a lower low major trend reversal. On this chart, it's simply a bear trend and then a micro double bottom. A lower low micro double bottom, but a good looking bull bar after a good looking bull bar. And around a 50% pullback of the bull trend. We have a bear breakout that lasts about 10 bars. It's a micro channel. Every high is at or below the high of the prior bar. That's a sign of strong bears. And a micro channel is a breakout. If not on this chart, then certainly on a higher timeframe chart. We have a four bar bull micro channel here, four bar bull micro channel here. These are attempts to reverse the bear trend. But when a bear trend is in a very tight bear channel like this, every one of these bull reversal attempts will probably be a bear flag. A bear breakout and lower prices. Most reversals fail, so traders should assume that the bull reversal attempts will become bear flags and that the bear trend will resume. It's a low one sell setup here. We had a low one here and then it became a low two. Traders will sell below that bar or below this bar. And they'll sell below that bar and below this bar or that bar. Expecting the bull reversals to fail, even though they're bull micro channels. A four bar bull micro channel, and the same here, but minor compared to the size of the bear trend. Here, five bar bull micro channel. Two pretty strong bull bars. Chances are the first reversal down will fail. Traders betting on the reversal could buy with a limit order at the low of the prior bar. Here we have about a 10 bar bear micro channel. Traders assume the first reversal up will fail. So some traders will place a limit order to sell at the high of the prior bar. Even though it's a micro double bottom, up, down, up, and a higher low. It would not have this 8, 9, 10 bar bear micro channel if the bulls were all that strong. So traders will sell. Here, it looks like a pullback, but there's no pullback. This low did not fall below that low. This low did not fall below that low. The bull micro channel extends from here to here, where the first pullback was. Traders expect the first reversal down to fail. They'll buy with a limit order at the low of that bar. They'll be filled here and they get a little bit more up. If you're looking to sell, do I want to sell this? No, the first breakout below a bull micro channel probably will fail. If I'm looking to sell, maybe I'll take a second entry, especially since we have a good bear bar here. The market went below it, triggering that short. And then we have a second bear bar here. The market went below it, triggering that short. This is a higher probability short than that. This is probably a buy. This is a sell. On the reversal up, we tried the bottom here. A decent looking bull bar. And we have a micro double bottom. Down, up, down, up. It failed. And now we have a consecutive bottom attempt. This is a higher probability buy. Here's the first break below a bull micro channel. It failed. And then we have another small bull micro channel. This is a second attempt down. Higher probability of success. Also a decent looking bear bar. Also, the entire screen looks like a trading range. And when the market is near the bottom of a trading range, bulls like to buy second reversals up. When the market is near the top of the trading range, bears like to sell second reversals down. Three pushes up and then a pretty strong bear micro channel. We fell for about eight bars without a pullback. Strong bear breakout, especially these four bear bars. Probably the first reversal up will fail. It could be a strong enough breakout to result in a bear trend. It turned out that it was. You have to sell for any reason. A bull breakout above the bear micro channel probably will fail. So you can sell above the prior bar. You can sell below this bar, low one bear flag. After the third bar closing on or near its low, you can start to sell closes there. And you can sell bull closes as well. Betting that reversal attempts will fail. We're getting a series of bull bars here. Higher low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout, higher low. Head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Here we're getting three bull bars. And then a doji bar. Four, five, six, seven bull bars. This is probably strong enough so that we'll get at least a small second leg up. Therefore, the first bear break below the bull trend line will probably fail. And bulls will look to buy the reversal down. Betting that it will become a bull flag instead of a bear trend. Traders will buy for any reason. They'll buy at the low of the prior bar. This is then a two bar bear micro channel. It's a bull flag. Bulls will buy above the high of the prior bar. Betting that the breakout of the bull flag will go up high enough for a profit. And after the third, fourth, or fifth close, traders will buy closes. Here they'll buy bull closes. The first bear bar, they'll buy the bear close. Betting that the bear reversal attempt will fail. Look at this. This bar did not pull below that bar's low. We did not get a pullback until up here. This is an 18 bar bull micro channel. Will traders buy that low? Well, they might, right? First pullback. However, this three bull bars, big bars closing on their highs. You have an unusually strong bull breakout late in a bull trend. It increases the chances that this is an exhaustive buy climax and the end of a trend. This is the start of the day. Here's the end of yesterday. 18 bars without a pullback over two days. Let's say a bull started buying closes. And let's say they bought this close. Obviously, it's buy the close here. It's buy the close here and here. And it's buy the close here. The bulls who bought that close would be disappointed to see this bear bar and this bear bar. A lot of bulls will then place a limit order to get out break even at their first entry. They bought here. They'll place a limit order to get out break even here. And look what took place on this bar. It went a little bit above that close. And the bar then sold off. That tells you that a lot of bulls use this little rally to get out break even. They're no longer willing to be long at this price. The bulls are selling. And that resulted in a reversal down. Big bear bar closing on its low. After three bear bars, totally reversing this bar, or almost totally reversing it, this big bear bar is the final bulls giving up. The bulls who bought that close or any of these closes held for a bar or two or three and then decided after three bear bars, four bear bars, it's not worth being long. And they gave up hoping to buy again lower. The market's always in short. Bull micro channel. Good bull bar. Bull bar. Series of bull bars. This is the euro versus the dollar. Five minute chart. A seven bar bull micro channel. This bar traded below that bar is low. So the bull micro channel began here. But the bull trend, the tight bull channel, began here. This strong bull micro channel is occurring late in a bull trend. Maybe this is 20 bars into the bull trend. When you get a very strong breakout, we have a breakout here, a breakout here, and then a four bar breakout here. When you get a strong breakout occurring 20 or more bars into a trend, it's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend than it is the start of a new stronger trend. Exhaustion does not mean reversal into a bear trend. It simply means the bulls don't want to buy and you get a pause or a reversal. We have a one bar pullback. Bulls will buy this low even though it's a bear bar. Some bulls will buy that high. And they're happy at the close of this bar. But what happens with the close of this bar? The bulls are giving up. They're deciding that the market's not going to go higher. That will probably pull back 5, 10 bars or more. A micro double top. The bulls quickly gave up. They quickly decided that it's not worth being long. And this reversal down is the start of that give up process. The bulls selling out of their longs and the bears selling into shorts. After 3 or 4 consecutive bear bars closing near their lows, bulls will sell and bears will begin to sell as well. Expecting at least a small second leg down. You can call this a spike and channel bull trend. We have a bull breakout, a big bull bar, and then a parabolic channel. If I drew lines across the highs, you can see the lines are getting more and more vertical. So, spike and channel. Or you can call it a spike and a parabolic channel bull trend. Usually when you have a spike, pullback channel, the market comes down and tests near the bottom of the channel. Which it did here. We have a breakout point here. This bull bar broke out above that high. And the breakout point finally got tested over here. At this point we have a gap. This high, that low. The bears tried to close the gap here. Could not. But, 80 bars later or so, the bears finally got below the breakout point. And then this gap closed and this became an exhaustion gap. A fairly good sell climax. We have five consecutive bear bars. Much stronger bear trend than this. Trend resumption. Breakout. Trading range. Trend resumption down. And it's a bear micro channel. This high is above that high. This is the start of the bear micro channel. And it lasted about five bars. That's a breakout. And when you get a breakout occurring 20 or more bars into a bear trend. That breakout is more likely going to be an exhaustive move. An exhaustion gap. Than it is the start of a stronger new bear trend. Should you sell the high of this bar? You can, but only if you can use a wide stop. Maybe up here. And are willing to scale in higher. However, when you get a sell climax late in a bear trend, usually better not to take the sell. Wait five or ten bars and see if the bulls can reverse. In this video, I began by talking about tight trading ranges. And then I talked about breakouts late in trends. And trying to determine whether they will lead to a new leg in the breakout. Or will there be an exhaustive end of the trend? I'm Al Brooks. This is the second of two videos on tight channels and micro channels. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course.