 This is Al Brooks. This is the fifth of five videos on swing trading examples. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. I'm going to be talking about some day trading examples of swing trades. I always pay attention to the open and how the market behaves. And if you get consecutive strong trend bars in the same direction, there's a higher probability that you'll get some continuation in that direction. Here on the open, we have a pair of big bear bars reversing down from a gap up open. And the bear bars closed on their low or near their low. The market, therefore, is always in short. It's more likely to go lower before it gets above the top of the consecutive bear bars. The bulls are trying to get an opening reversal up, a pullback to the moving average. And they're hoping that this will be the low of the day and that we trend up. However, after consecutive big bear bars, it's more likely that there'll be sellers above and we'll get at least a small second leg down. Two other problems with this reversal. First, it did not quite reach the moving average. And usually if you get a sell-off that becomes an opening reversal and it's near the moving average, it has to touch the moving average or go a little bit below it. And then also, there is a fairly conspicuous tail on top of the bull bar. And the bull bar, the body, is smaller than the body of the two bear bars. Bears will therefore sell at the high of the bull bar, expecting the market to go down at least a little bit. Other bears will sell this as a double top bear flag or a double top reversal. A gap up and a double top and basically a small low two rally. Two legs up. A bull bar, a bear bar, and then another bull bar. Not a great short below a bull bar, but we're probably already always in short from the consecutive bear bars. And therefore, it's a reasonable short. We have a big bear bar closing on its low, closing below all the bars of the day. And there is a follow-through bar that has a bear body. That increases the chances that we'll go at least a little lower. The market tried to reverse up once, twice, three times, therefore a triangle. Anytime you have a trading range that tries to go one direction three times, it's a triangle. And traders will sell either the low two short below this bar or the triangle short below that bar, looking for at least a little bit more down. Remember, the market's always in short. And this rally is probably more of a 50% pullback of this sell-off and a breakout test of the breakout below this low, even though it went a little bit above. We have a bear breakout with three consecutive bear bars. The breakout probably will lead to a measured move down. The strongest part of the breakout is the open of this bar to the close of that bar. It might lead to a measured move down from the close of this bar, which takes us down here. And that is a reasonable location for the bears to take at least partial profits. I also look for a leg one, leg two measured move. So leg one, then we pull back to a double top. And leg two started with this bear bar. And therefore the leg two projection is down here. This is a very tight bear channel. We have a six bar bear micro channel at this point. And now we're getting a bear break up below a bear channel. 75% chance it's going to fail and reverse up to get to at least the top of the channel. The channel is very tight. That's not saying much. But anytime you get a bear break up below a bear channel, it's more likely to reverse than continue down. That's another reason why bears will be taking profits down in this general area. The biggest bear bar late in a bear trend, certainly since this bar, probably is going to be an exhaustion bar, an exhaustion gap rather than a measuring gap. The bulls hope to get above the bottom of the gap. The bulls want to close the gap. We have a bear breakout, a two bar bear breakout. And the gap is between the close of this bar and the low of any of these bars. And the bulls want to get above all of these bars and especially above this bar. This is the follow through bar after the big breakout bar by the bears. Terrible follow through. Probably will reverse at least a little bit up, at least to the top of the cell climax bar, maybe to the top of the two bar cell climax. We have a two bar breakout, two consecutive bear bars, bigger bodies closing near their lows. Maybe the breakout point is this low and therefore the top of the gap is this low. The top of the cell climax is this high. And that is always a target whenever you have a cell climax late in a bear trend. It's a bear spike in channel. We have a bear spike, bear breakout, a pullback and then a channel down. Two around, a measured move down from the height of the spike. And a leg one, leg two measured move. Bulls will buy a reversal up above this bull bar, betting that we'll get at least to this high. Possibly to the top of the channel up here. This is also a good location for the swing bears to get out. They know that yes, it's still always in short, but they don't want to see a bull bar after two bear bars breaking out below a bear channel. They don't want to see a reversal up at a measured move target and a leg one, leg two measured move. They don't want to see consecutive bull bars. They don't want to see three consecutive bull bars. And therefore the always in bears will get out. Probably by the third or fourth bar, most traders look at this as always in long and expect at least two legs sideways, two up. Leg one, pull back, leg two. Is it a minor reversal or a major reversal? It's a 10 bar tight bear channel and it's inside maybe a 30 bar very tight bear channel. Not a clear big wedge, not a clear lower low major trend reversal. Therefore, this is probably a minor reversal that will lead to a rally up to test resistance, either at the top of this bear bar, the top of these five bear bars, or the top of the channel. Remember, this is a spike pullback channel. The market usually tries to get to the top of the channel and then enters a trading range. Is there enough room for the bulls to buy for a scalp? Well, there probably is. Is this going to lead to a bull trend? Probably not. If the bears want, they could stay short and keep their stop above the top of the bull trend, or maybe at the top of the spike, possibly the top of the bear channel. But that is an obvious magnet and the market's going to try to get there. Most bears, given this set of circumstances, the measured move, the bear break up below the bear channel, a good looking bull bar after the bear breakout, the bear breakout not being particularly good, most bears would exit above this bull bar or certainly buy the third bull close right here. Aggressive bulls would buy here or they'd buy the third or fourth bull close, looking for at least a couple of legs sideways to up. The bulls, they'll buy where the bears are getting out. The bears get out either above the reversal bar after the sell climax or on the third bull close. We sold off and then entered a tight trading range, a triangle. It's a limit order market. Bears will sell above bars, above this bear bar, above this bear bar. And the bulls will buy below bars. The bulls will buy either at this low or lower. They might buy the size of a scalp below, maybe the size of two scalps below. The bulls will use a wide stop, betting that this is not a very strong bear trend. Bad follow through after this breakout. Bad follow through after this breakout. It's probably a bear leg in what will become a trading range. And therefore bulls are willing to buy at prior lows and scale in lower. Bears are looking to sell above bars, expecting the swing down to continue. They'll sell above this bear bar. We have an attempt at a double bottom, but not a good buy signal bar. The bears will sell here as well. Stop maybe above the top of the most recent strong bear leg. Bulls place limit orders to buy at the prior low. Low of this bar, the low of that bar. Betting that the bear breakout will fail. At a minimum, the bulls who are buying below the bottom of this small trading range, need to stop at least more than a measured move down. The top of the bear sell-off, the bottom of the bear sell-off, measured move down, stop a little bit below. A lot of these bulls will buy the size of a scalp below the first entry, maybe twice the size of a scalp below the first entry. More will look to buy above a bull bar reversing up if the stop does not get hit. This is a logical location for a stop. The bulls who bought here will hold short, hold short, hold short, and when they get a decent-looking bull bar, they'll buy on a stop above its high, expecting the market to come at least back to their original entry, where they can get out break-even on their first entry, and then with the scalp on their second. They'll only take this second buy if it's at least the size of a scalp below the first entry. They prefer it to be two to three times the size of a scalp, so that they can make two to three times the size of a minimum scalp on the reversal up. Is it a swing up? Very tight bear channel. Probably the first reversal up is minor, and it'll lead either to a trading range or to a resumption of the bear trend, a bear flag. Once it gets back to their original entry at the bottom of this trading range, a lot of bulls will take partial profits or full profits. They get out break-even on their first entry and with a profit on their second entry, or they get out break-even on their first entry and then hold and wait until there's a credible reversal down. This is about a 10-bar bull micro-channel with a lot of bull bars. A lot of the bulls will not exit below that bull bar, but they might exit below this bear bar, the second reversal down, second or third reversal down after a minor reversal that's probably going to lead to a trading range. You do not want to be holding long near the top of what you believe will become a trading range. We have consecutive strong bear bars, but we have a tight bull channel, an 11-bar bull micro-channel. No pullbacks for 11 bars, only one small bear bar. Probably a minor reversal down and a trading range. However, the reversal up is probably minor as well because the channel down is so tight and there's no clear bottom yet. This is not a good lower low major trend reversal or a good wedge bottom. And therefore the rally is probably a bull leg in the trading range or simply a bear flag. When there are consecutive bear bars like this and we have a potential double top bear flag, break below the neckline, measured move down, the bulls will get out either below this bear bar or on the close of the second consecutive bear bar, because at least two small legs down are likely. One pullback two or one pullback two. The swing bears who exited above this bull bar are looking to sell again. And it's reasonable to short here. However, after 11 bars up, they'll probably get a second entry short with a decent sell signal bar, which they have here or here or here. Therefore, the swing bears, the bears who are looking for a swing short will sell either here or below this bar here or below this bar here or below this bar here. Looking for a swing down. We have three reversals up one, pullback two, pullback three. It's a triangle. Probably leg one, pullback and then leg two or leg two. It's reasonable for the swing bears to take this short, put a stop above the high of this bar and hold on to see if they get a swing down. We now have a pair of consecutive bear bars, both closing below this higher low. Probably we're going to get more down. Not good follow through here or here, but bears can sell that close stop above the top of the most recent bear leg. We have a bear channel yesterday and now we have a big gap up. We have a two bar reversal. The market tried to sell off. It's trying to resume up again, but forming a double top. We have another bear bar closing near its low. Some bears will sell this as a double top with yesterday's high. They'll sell below the bear bar and put a stop just above its high. We have a bear bar and a follow through bar. Okay to sell the close of this bear bar or sell below the low of this bear bar. Taking a chance that this is the high of the day. We have consecutive bear bars and one of the bars is very strong. At this point we're always in short, probably at least a small second leg down before we get above the top of the original sell off. Because we're always in short and this is not a good buy signal bar, some bears will sell at the high of this bar, get filled here, or they'll sell the size of a scalp above the high of that bear bar and get filled there. They'll bet on a lower high and at least a small second leg down. At this point we have a wedge higher low. We have a low here and then we have a reversal up here. Second reversal up. One, two, and this is possibly the start of a third reversal up. It's reasonable for the swing bears to get out above this bar because of the possibility of a gap up and a wedge higher low, low of the day, opening reversal up from the moving average. Technically at this point we're still always in short and it's reasonable for the bears to stay short, stop above the top of the sell off. Even though this bar has a bare body, it's still either a high two or a wedge bull flag near the moving average. It's reasonable for the bears to exit short. It's also reasonable for the bears to hold short with a stop above here. Now we have a pair of consecutive bull bars and the bulls could buy this close betting that we've become always in long. We have an opening reversal up from the moving average. We have a big breakout above a bear channel, a bull flag, and a two-legged pullback to the moving average or near the moving average. Now we're reversing up and now we have consecutive bull bars. The bears want a double top with this high. The bulls want this to be an opening reversal and the start of a big bull trend day. Both have reasonable arguments. When that happens, usually the market ends up going sideways. For the bulls, if they took this buy, their stop is below the bottom of the wedge. Since we may get one more push down, one pullback two, pullback three, some bulls will use a wider stop and in fact buy more at this low, betting that just like we fell below this low and reversed up, if we fall below this low, we'll probably reverse up as well. The bars are not big. We're still below this high and still below the top of the initial sell-off. Maybe we're a little bit above this high, but we have not broken strongly above it. And again, the bull bodies are not particularly big and the second bull body is smaller than the first. And therefore, instead of the momentum picking up as we reverse out of this bull flag, we're losing momentum. At this point, four of the past five bars were bear bars. That also weakens the bull case. Bulls need more than simply a break a little bit above this lower high. They need a breakout above the high of the day, especially a strong breakout above the high of the day. Otherwise, this is not likely to lead to a bull trend and will probably lead to a trading range or even a bear trend. The bulls are continuing to push up, but where are the consecutive big bull trend bars? We're probably always in long at this point. A lot of the bulls would get up below this low. A wedge, three pushes up, one, two, and then three. It's reasonable to get out of longs there. Some bears would sell here. Other bears would be concerned that we have nine bars up without much of a pullback, possibly an early small pullback bull trend. The picture is confusing. Whenever the picture is confusing, the market usually goes sideways. For the bears, reasonable to sell here. A wedge, lower, high. One, second push up, third push up, lower high. Testing the high of the double top. Decent bear bar closing near its low. Reasonable to sell on a stop just below its low. And put a stop above the high of the day. Taking the chance that this is going to be a bear trend. With the first bar of the day being the high of the day. For the bulls, we're probably always in the long. It's okay for them to hold long, betting on a double bottom bull flag and a break above the high of the day and the start of a swing up. Which side has higher probability? Well, both have reasonable arguments and I think it's pretty much 50-50. 50% chance we'll get a bull breakout and a swing up. 50% chance we'll get a bear breakout and a swing down. It's reasonable to be holding long with a stop below here. It's reasonable to be holding short with a stop above here. We have a bear break below the wedge lower high and a follow through bar. So we're back to always in short for a swing down. The bulls who bought or were holding long would either get out below the low of that bear bar or on the close of either of these bear bars. The bears who get out above this bear bar would have to go short again below this low 2 short. Low 1, low 2 and a lower high. Or they would wait for consecutive bear bars and then sell the close of this bar. The bulls who bought here or above here hoping for a break to a new high. This bar is telling us that they're getting out. They're desperate to get out. They're eager to get out. And they all sold and it created a big bear bar. And the bears saw that as well. And they sold in addition to the bulls. Some traders will sell the close of the bear breakout below the wedge lower high. Others will wait for the close of the second bar and sell there. Others will sell a low 1 short. We try to reverse up. It's a low 1 short below that bar and they'd get filled over here. Reasonable setup for at least a second leg down and probably a measured move down. We're sideways for the first hour. Probably when we break out we'll get a measured move up or down. And it looks like at this point we're going to get the break below the low of the day and then a measured move down. We have a bear breakout and a follow through bar. That could lead to a measured move down as well. Open of the first bar. Close of the second bar. Measured move target here. You can argue the entire 15 bars, 20 bars is a breakout mode setup. And therefore a breakout will lead to a measured move down. This high, that low. Measured move down. A double top reversal. Double top. Neckline. Measured move down. Consecutive bear bars here and here. Consecutive cell climaxes. These two bars. These two bars. That bar. Whenever you get a series of cell climaxes with bad follow through after every cell climax. Here. And then a doji, doji, doji. Here. Bull bar. Doji bar. You're probably going to get a reversal up to at least a trading range. Now we have the biggest bear bar of the day. 20 or more bars into a trend. Whenever you have the biggest bear bar occurring 20 or more bars into a trend. It's more likely to be an exhaustive end of the trend than it is a measuring gap and the start of a new leg down. Bulls, therefore, will look to buy a reversal up. Like above the high of this bull bar. Or here we have a micro double bottom. Up, down, trying to go up. If you're a stellar close bear who sold this close or that close. And then you see this. What are you thinking? You're thinking, gosh, I don't like that. That's bad follow through. And this could be a higher low. So this could be a bull breakout. And then a bull flag leading to resumption of the trend up. Leg one, pull back leg two. The bears who sold that close or the follow through bar close are disappointed. And a lot of them, as soon as they see the close of this bull bar, will try to get off break even. They'll place a buy limit order to exit their shorts around their original entry at this close or that close. And that caused this. And here the final bears are buying back their shorts. The bears were hoping this big bear bar would lead to a second leg down. And it did. This pause bar followed by this bull bar might be the second leg down. This little bear bar will be the second leg down for other bears. And that might be all that the bears get. They kept trying to get a bear breakout. And so far all they're getting is a tail on the bottom of a bull bar. And then a bear bar followed by two bull bars. The bears are failing. And they're probably going to give up soon. The bears who sold this close are disappointed by this. And again by another bull bar here. And they're trying to get off break even. And the final bears gave up here or here. Bulls know what's going on. They see the biggest bear bar. 20 or more bars into a bear trend. And they see the higher low. And they see the follow through bar. They know it's a sell signal. However, they also see consecutive sell climaxes. Here, bad follow through. Here, bad follow through. Here, bad follow through. Here, bad follow through. Here, not all that big a breakout. Bad follow through. Here, maybe we'll get bad follow through. And maybe this will form a higher low. Therefore, in this kind of a circumstance, aggressive bulls will start buying where the bears are selling. They'll buy the bear close of a big bear breakout and the follow through bar. And they'll start buying below bars at the low of this bar. At the low of this bar and get filled here. The bulls who take those buys need a stop at least below a measured move down. Maybe from the open of this sell climax bar to the close of this bar or the close of the follow through bar. They need a stop a little bit below its low. Maybe a stop a little bit below this low. They're buying, betting that it'll get to the top of the final sell climax before it falls for a measured move down. And that is reasonable. Many bulls will not take those aggressive buys buying the bear closes. They want higher probability. They need a reversal up before they start to buy. We have a bull bar here. Maybe they buy above this as a micro double bottom, knowing that the seller close bears here and here will buy back the shorts. Others will buy the close of this bull bar, consecutive bull bars. Looking at a minimum for a test of the high of the final sell climax and possibly the test of this spike pullback channel. Other bulls will buy with limit orders. At this point, we've had four consecutive bull bars. The bears can argue wedge bear flag, a pullback low one, pullback low two, pullback low three, but a terrible sell signal bar, it's a bull body. And we've had four bars out of the past five having bull bars, bull bodies. Probably more buyers than sellers below the low of that bar. And the bear bar, especially with that tail below, probably more traders buying that close than selling that close. And the same here. A lot of bulls will buy it betting on a small double bottom, high or low, and swing up. Other bulls will buy with stops. We have a small bull flag after reversal. They'll buy above the high of that bar, stop below here. And now we have either a double bottom bull flag or a small triangle, three pushes down, one, two, three, and we have a bull bar closing on its high. They'll buy above that bull bar or above this bull bar, hoping for a trade up. We have a breakout, three consecutive bull bars closing above the top of this trading range, this triangle. Some bulls will buy above the high of a bull bar here, looking for at least a scalp up. Remember, this sell-off is in a tight bear channel. The first reversal up, no matter how strong, probably will be minor, which means it will either become a bear flag or a trading range. And in either case, it probably will sell off soon. So it's getting risky to buy too high near potential resistance, the top of the spike pullback channel. Buy the closed bulls, they'll buy closes all the way up. One bull is not going to buy all closes. Some traders do, but much more common, they buy one close or two closes, and then look to scalp out part or swing part. When the market tries repeatedly to do something and fails, it usually then tries to do the opposite. It usually reverses. Just like the bears had bad follow through all the way down, and it led to a reversal, this sell-off became a bear leg in a trading range. The rally has problems as well. Bull bar, bad follow through. Bull bar, bad follow through. Bull bar, bad follow through. Bull breakout, not very big, bad follow through. And therefore, this rally probably is a bull leg and will become a trading range. Also, because it's such a tight, bear channel here, this is probably a minor reversal, which means instead of a bull trend, it probably will go sideways and form a trading range. Context, good for a trading range. We reverse down from yesterday's high, and we're reversing up from near yesterday's low. We have a bear leg in a trading range. Expect a bull leg in a trading range. We have a bull leg in a trading range. Expect a bear leg in a trading range. In a trading range, traders look to buy low and buy more lower. They look to sell high and sell more higher. And they look to take quick profits. They're not looking for a swing trade. The rally here might simply be a breakout test below this breakout point. Even though it went a little bit above, it's also a wedge rally. One, pull back. Two, pull back. Three. And it's about a 50% pullback, a little bit more. All are reasons for traders to begin to take profits. Also, the bulls see it's three pushes up, so it's a wedge rally. And the follow through after each leg up has been bad. So, the follow through after this bull bar will probably be bad as well. And the bears might get a couple of legs down toward the bottom of the trading range. For the bulls, they have a bear flag here. But instead of a bear breakout, we have a bull breakout. And the pullback twice held above the top of the breakout point. And therefore, this might be a measuring gap. Here's the start of the reversal. Here's the potential gap. And traders will expect profit-taking bulls and aggressive bears to sell around a measured move up. It's also the top of this channel. Spike pullback channel. A logical place for bulls to take profits and for aggressive bears to begin selling. I talked about the wedge channel. Three pushes up. One pullback two. Pullback three. And we're trying to get a bull breakout above a bull channel. Usually, it fails and you get at least a minor reversal down to the bottom of the channel. The channel is very tight. So, it does not take much of a move down to hit the bottom of the channel. I do not have the trend line drawn in. For the bears, they have a decent sell signal bar. Now, they have a wedge rally. It's a reasonable short. Aggressive bears will sell the close of this breakout bar. Even though it's not particularly big, it's the biggest bull bar in about 20 bars. And therefore, likely to be a climactic end of the rally. It's also around a measured move up from this gap, this high and these lows. And it's near the top of the first pullback after the reversal down. All of those reasons are good enough for traders to start to take profits, for the bulls to take profits. And therefore, the bears will sell. Aggressive bears will sell a strong bull close, betting against the breakout, betting instead on a climactic exhaustion gap. Other bears will sell below bear bars. Like right here, getting filled below that bar, getting filled right here. If you take that short, where do you put your stop? At a minimum, probably a measured move up. We have a gap this high, that low. And we're already at that measuring gap. Maybe we'll get a measured move up based upon spike pullback channel, which is up here. And therefore, the bears selling here, they can either get up above the top of the wedge, or they can use a wider stop and scale in higher above this bar, but below their stop. Rally is a fairly tight bull channel. And a lot of bears want a higher probability short. They have three consecutive bull bars here, and then three here. Therefore, a lot of bears will not take the first reversal down. They'll wait until we get three or four bear bars, and then they'll sell closes, or they'll sell at the height of the prior bar, looking for at least a small second leg down. Here's three consecutive bear bars, two closing near their lows. After a wedge top and a double top, and a lower high, it's reasonable to take the short, looking for a test at the bottom of the bear trend. Traders who take the short selling that third close, most of them will put a stop above the top of the reversal. After three bear bars, a wedge top, and a lower high, and a double top, a lot of bears will sell with a limit order at the high of the prior bar, and get filled here. Or above the high of this bar, and get filled here. Others prefer to sell with stops. They'll either sell below the wedge, bar here, or they'll wait for some kind of a double top, this high, that low. Therefore, a double top bear flag, or a double top lower high. Traders will sell below a bear bar, like below this bar and get filled here. Or simply below the low of the prior bar. In this case, a bull bar, but some bears will take that short, because it's a little too short after a reversal from a lower high. Now we're getting three bear bars, four, five, six, seven consecutive bear bars. Traders will start selling closes, especially when we start to get closes near the lows of the bar, here or here. Stop above the top of the bear leg. And a lot of these bears will be willing to sell more higher, if the market immediately reverses up after they enter. They'd keep their stop up here. At this point, we've had six consecutive bear bars, a very tight bear channel. Six consecutive bear bars is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. If this is a five minute chart, these six bear bars probably will be a strong bear bar on the 60 minute chart. And two strong bear bars on the 15 minute chart. The odds are, we'll go at least a little lower. A wedge rally, probably at least two legs down, maybe one pullback, two. But when those two legs are in a very tight channel like that, it's usually a more complex reversal, and the entire bear channel becomes the first leg, pullback, and then a second leg. A big bear bar, 20 bars into the bear trend, is it more likely a measuring gap or an exhaustion gap? We're near the bottom of a trading range, probably an exhaustion gap. Therefore, traders will look for a reversal up, especially a second entry buy. This bar went above the high of that bar, but not a very good buy. And then this bar was a decent looking buy signal bar. And the next bar went above it. Stopped below here for the bulls who took that buy. We reversed down here, here, here. We reversed up here, here, here. If you want, you can call it a triangle. You can call it a tight trading range. In any case, it's breakout mode. When you have a breakout mode set up, here, a triangle, 50% chance the first breakout will fail and reverse. When you ultimately get a successful reversal, there's a 50% chance it'll be up, 50% chance it'll be down. Can you redraw the triangle and call it a double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal, bear trend bull breakout, and then a double bottom, high or low? A lot of computers will do that. A lot of computers will do that. And they'll look to buy above the high of a bull bar, like right here, especially since it's the second entry buy. Here's the first, and then here's the second. Triangle, breakout mode, and a limit order market. Bulls will buy at the prior low and buy more lower as long as the second entry is at least as big as the scalp. And bears will sell above, betting that the reversal up will fail as well. Here's the second reversal up. This bar, traded above the high of this bar. So that's the first reversal up, not a good buy signal bar. And this is the second reversal up. It's a high 2. Traders can either buy above the high of this bar. This is a high 2. Traders can either buy above the high or the low. If you want to hit the high, you don't have to hit the high. And that's the first reversal up. So if you want to hit the high, you can see the second reversal up. And that's what you want to hit the high high. You can see the second reversal up. Here's the second reversal up. This bar, traded above the high of this bar. So that's the first reversal up. Not a good buy signal bar. And this is the second reversal up. It's a high 2. Traders can either buy above the high of this bear bar or if they prefer, buy above the bull bar. It's slightly higher probability that it's the start of a swing. At the end of the day, the bodies are getting bigger and we're starting to get bars closing on their highs. And we have a trading range day that is finishing up as a buy the close bull trend. Maybe after the third or fourth bar, traders will start buying closes and they'll get out below a bear bar and they'll even get out below a bull bar if the bull bar pulls back four or more ticks below the low of the prior bar. When that happens, there's a higher probability that the breakout is going to reverse into the close. End of the day, buy the close bull trend. Some bulls will take two or three of these buys and just keep adding on to their original position. Most traders who are looking for multiple buys are traders who took partial or full profits after the first buy. In other words, they scalp out and then they look to buy again if the market remains strong. The first bear close and a buy the close bull trend, the bulls will buy it betting that the first reversal down will fail and that will go at least a little bit higher. In general, when you have a reasonably strong buy the close bull trend, the bulls will exit a little bit below the low of the prior bar, usually one tick or one pip. And they'll also exit four or five pips or ticks below the low of the prior bar. This bar did not trade below that bar, but a lot of the bears would have sold below the low of this bear bar. At the end of the session near the top of the range, it's reasonable to take profits and then start to trade again tomorrow. This was a video talking about additional swing trading examples for day traders. Unfortunately, no tradesman authors, instead. In other words, they normally stop mentioning this genre if not the Sit lady believes that the vera bar is that these little BRSS ones will see it holder where they end up�리 with their ltt Yahoo bitch, think so. On the fuels it, their blueprint is relação to attribution of the addition of the l attempts in futile column to the tier 1 second annual rule of this crime. And in this case, the proof you wanted to work your family, I'm eagerly as victuals, so that when you're interested in any community starting point, is not rightагmed by anybody Garrett another isot 힘들 headline but admit them to嘛. Instead of read, see, please put Mueller's attention to your head off,