 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video is about pullbacks and bar counting. I'll begin by talking about what exactly a pullback is and then next I'll talk about what bar counting is. In a bull trend, like we have over here, a pullback is when the low of a bar goes below the low of the prior bar. So there are no pullbacks here. This is the first pullback. In a bear trend, it's the opposite. The first pullback occurs when the high of a bar goes above the high of a prior bar. You can see we had a bull bar here, but it did not go above the high of the prior bar. And this bar did not go above the high of that bar. So this is the first pullback in the bear trend. Here we have a bull trend, but look at this. We have a tail on the top of the bar. So the market went up and it went down, but it did not go below the low of the prior bar. And here we have a bear bar. So the market opened here, traded down and reversed up. But this bar did not go below the low of that bar. So it's not a pullback, at least not on this timeframe. Let's say this is a five minute chart. This is an inferred or an implied pullback on a lower timeframe chart, just as this is as well. So even though it did not trade below the low of any five minute bar on a smaller timeframe chart, like a one minute or two minute or a three minute chart, it probably did trade below the low of the prior bar. So on the five minute chart, this is implying that there's a pullback on a smaller timeframe and saying, and the same is true with this. So for example, a five minute chart, no pullback, but we have a bear bar and we have a big tail. One minute chart, you can see this bar went below the low of that bar. So in fact, there was a pullback. So this bear bar on the five minute chart is an implied pullback. It implies that there is a pullback taking place, not on the five minute chart, but on a lower timeframe chart. And likewise, this tail right here where the market went up and down here, it is here up and down. And in fact, this bar traded below the low of that bar on the one minute chart. So there was a pullback here. That's important because pullbacks tell you that the trend is probably going to resume soon and it gives you an opportunity to enter. So traders look for pullbacks and they enter. If they see an implied pullback on the five minute chart, they may choose to buy at the close of that bear bar, betting that the trend will resume and that it's only a small pullback on the one minute chart. So here's the five minute chart. And we have an implied pullback here. Here's the bear bar. I'm always paying attention to pullbacks, even implied pullbacks here, a bear bar here, a prominent tail. Here we have a bear trend and any bar that has a big tail on the bottom is an implied pullback because on a smaller timeframe chart, the market went up and it probably went above the high of a prior bar. So here's the five minute chart and we have an implied pullback and it's an actual pullback on the one minute chart. So this is this and then the market went up and here the market went up. This bar went above that bar. So that tail on the five minute chart implies that there probably is a pullback on the one minute chart. When you see a relatively strong trend and you see a tail like that, a lot of traders will sell that one. Traders will sell that close, betting that the trend will soon resume. You know, you're looking for reasons to enter and that is a reason to enter. The purpose of looking for pullbacks in trends is they give traders a high probability trade. So, for example, here's a pullback after the market went up about eight or 10 bars. Chances are the market's going higher. So traders can either buy with a stop one tick above that bar or one pip above if it's a Forex market. Or they can buy with a limit order either on the close of that bar or at the low of that bar. This little tail on the bottom of the bar is probably a small pullback on a smaller timeframe. The market went up here and down and then down more and then up. And this is a pullback on this timeframe, the five minute chart, because the low is below the low of the prior bar. Likewise, this is a pullback. And then here's a second pullback within the same bull flag. So this entire four or five bar sequence is a pullback and it pulled back twice. Once, tried to resume, twice. And this is a bigger pullback. Here it lasted about 20 bars or so. Traders are looking to buy when the trend resumes. So when they see a pullback, they place a buy stop order one tick above the high of the prior bar. So that when the market goes above that bar, they get long. Now in a bull trend, if you buy one tick above this bar, you do not put your stop there. You have to put a stop way down here. In the video on stops, I will talk about the correct place for stops. In general, when you are buying in a trend, you're taking a high probability trade. When you're taking a high probability trade, you have to pay for it. There's somebody taking the opposite position. So you have to give that person something. Usually you're giving that person a good risk reward ratio. And in a bull trend, that usually means that your risk is big. His risk is small. When you get high probability buying pullbacks, the other side is getting good risk reward. Your stop is down here. And this is what I was talking about. Use a wide stop. Now, I said a pullback is a high probability bet that the trend would resume. However, at some point, the pullback can grow to so many bars that the probability of the trend resuming up is the same as the probability of the trend reversing down. In general, once a pullback grows to 20 or more bars, I start using the term trading range instead of a pullback. And when I say trading range, what I'm meaning is that the probability is about the same now for the bears as it is for the bulls. Early on in a pullback, the odds are it's going to resume. But the more bars that get added to the pullback, the lower the probability becomes for the bulls and the higher it becomes for the bears. And at some point, it's equal. At some point in here, it's just as likely that we're going to go up as it is that we're going to go down. The bears see a double top bear flag or a lower high major trend reversal. The bulls see a high two buy or a double bottom bull flag. And they each have the same probability of success. Now, if you buy anywhere in here, your stop is over here. If you buy here, your stop is over here. And at some point, you raise your stop. Once you see enough of a trend resumption and it's strong, you raise your stop to the bottom of the most recent strong breakout. So if you're a bull and you bought anywhere, if you bought here, if you bought here, if you bought here, if you bought there, if you bought here, if you bought there, your stop is still here. It doesn't matter where you buy. Your stop is not dependent on where you buy. Your stop is simply dependent upon the price action. The price action, and if you're buying in a bull trend, your stop goes below the bottom of the most recent bull leg. Now think about that. So it doesn't matter where you bought, right? If you buy up here, this is your risk. At some point, the stop is so far below that your risk is great. And if you're an institutional trader, you have to reduce your risk. Every institution has a defined risk, a maximum risk that they will allow. And if a trend goes on too long, the stop is too far, the risk is too great. The easiest way to reduce risk is to reduce the position size. So they start to take partial profits. And when the bulls start to take profits, you get a pullback. When bulls take profits, the market goes down or sideways. And after a certain number of bars, the bulls conclude that the bears are unable to create a reversal, and the bulls buy again. And then once they have three, four, five good-looking bull bars, they now put their stop here instead of here. So they again reduce their risk. But when the risk gets too far again, they have to take some profits again to reduce their risk. Sometimes you get very deep pullbacks. You know, for example, here, a very strong reversal, probably a bull trend. We have a bear trend, a bull breakout, a higher low major trend reversal, and a very good trend up here. However, your stop is down here. And this might be simply a trading range. And it is. It's a trading range and a bull trend. It's technically still a bear trend because we're still below this high. And we could be making a very broad, bear channel. But in any case, at this point, it's very strong. And you're either in a bull trend or a trading range. And you need to stop down here because sometimes you get an extremely deep pullback. And you don't want to be stopped out. As long as your premise is still valid, the trend is still good. And it's okay to be in your position. But you have to rely on your stop. Many traders in a situation like this would get out early. Instead of relying on their stop here, they say, oh, this is too much of a reversal. I'll just get out. And then I'll look to buy again if we get a higher low and we start to turn up again. We have a wedge bottom here. One, two, three. And then we break out. So some traders would exit here and then buy back here. So we have a bear trend. And every lower high is resistance. Some lower highs are minor. And they're just part of a trading range. And it's common for the market to go above a minor lower high and then continue down to a new low. And the same is true when the market is starting to reverse up. You can still be in a bull trend and the market might fall below a minor low. So a minor low is a pullback, does not fall very far. The rally is not all that clear. And a lot of times the market will dip below that but still stay above the bottom of the bull trend. So we're still technically in a bull trend even though we fell below this minor low and these minor lows. However, this low, this rally is so strong that I think it's a major low. And the bulls do not want to see a pullback below this low. If it stays above that low, the bulls think this is still controlling the market and they're happy to remain long. Look at this. We sold off and we pulled back. And we rallied and we sold off. We rallied and we sold off. We rallied and we sold off. We rallied and we sold off. But there's something particular about each of those pullbacks. Something important about each of those pullbacks. So for example, we rallied here and we sold off to about halfway down. At this point, the distance to here where the bulls have their stop is the same as the distance to here where the bears who sold have their stop. So at this point, and the bulls assume it's going to go up here. The bears assume it's going to go down here. So for the bulls, this is their risk. That's their reward. For the bears, they're risking to up here and they're holding for a new low down here. So their risk and reward are equal. However, we're probably in a bull trend. Probably means 60% chance that the bulls will make money. 40% chance that the bears will make money. So a 50% pullback is a very important thing in a bull trend or in a bear trend as well. Because at 50%, risk and reward are the same for the bulls and the bears. The risk equals the reward and it's the same for the bulls and the bears. But if it's a bull trend, the probability favors the bulls. If it's a bear trend, the probability favors the bears. So 50% pullbacks in a bear trend, the bears are looking to sell. So here's the top of the bear trend, the bottom of the bear trend, 50% pullback. We're stalling because the bears believe that they're still in control and they're going to be selling. They'll place limit orders. They'll sell below bars. Bulls see a pretty good bull trend at this point and they're pretty confident. So they're looking to buy a 50% pullback. A lot of the math that traders use is based upon 50% pullbacks. Not Fibonacci 62% pullbacks or 38% pullbacks. But 50% pullbacks have a rational basis. Fibonacci numbers have no rational basis and most traders ignore them. I talk more about this math in the videos on measured moves and on the trader's equation and probability. Now, I said bears look to sell a 50% pullback. Some bears will place a limit order exactly at a 50% pullback. So when the rally gets there, they'll get short exactly there. That red box is where the bears would get filled. It has to go one tick above that red line for them to get filled on their short. If this was a forex market, it would have to go one pip above. Likewise, bulls look to buy a 50% pullback from a rally. Now, this is a rally. At this point, the rally is right here and it pulls back right here. As soon as this bar closes, the bulls will place a limit order to buy a 50% pullback. And look what happened on this bar. It went just below the 50% pullback and then it raced back up again. That tells you that a lot of bulls liked this rally, this reversal, and they decided that if it falls 50%, it's probably going to go back up here. So a lot of bulls place limit orders to buy there. Same thing here. The rally now extends up to here. It began down here. Here's a 50% pullback. So a lot of bulls will place a limit order to buy there or on the reversal up. A new leg up, this low, that high. Bulls place a limit order to buy a 50% pullback. And they might get filled on this bar. That bar clearly went almost clear. It looks like it went below the line. And if it did, they would get filled there. Other bulls will simply say, hey, it didn't fill my order, but it's closing on its low. The bears are trying to reverse. I think the bulls are going to win. So as soon as they see that bear bar close, they'll hit by the market. So they'll buy a strong bear bar, betting that the bear reversal attempt will fail and that the market will resume back up. Sometimes you'll have a very strong rally and a pullback that falls below the bottom of the rally. And it still can be a pullback from this rally. At least that's how I look at it. Sometimes you'll get a pullback that falls beyond the bottom of the bull trend. And a lot of traders will get stopped out or they'll get out on a big reversal down like this. But if they do and they see this as a possible pullback from this rally, they'll look to buy a resumption up above this buy bar or above that bar. Here's a bar closing on its high. Maybe they'll buy above that bar. You can see a lot of traders did buy there. You can see we gapped down on the open here. And then we rallied strongly. And then again, less strong. And then again, less strong. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Three is a parabolic wedge top. And it's a possible opening reversal in high of the day. So a lot of bears will sell below that bear bar. A lot of bulls who bought for any reason on the way up, like this close, that close below that bar, that bear close above this bear bar. They will get out below that bear bar just in case this parabolic wedge top becomes the high of the day and we have a bear trend down. This bar represents the bulls giving up. The bulls were hoping for a bull flag, maybe resumption, maybe resumption. And at some point, they give up and they think, oh, this is going to be an opening reversal down. And that's what took place right here. So at this point, the market's always in short, which means it's probably going lower. Not only do the bulls give up, the bears know what's going on as well, and they will sell as well. This still might be a pullback from this initial rally. It fell below the bottom of the rally today, and it also fell below the bottom of the entire bull trend, which took place at the end of yesterday. It still could be simply a big bull flag falling below the bottom of the bull trend. So traders will be ready to buy a reversal up. As I said, they might buy above that little doji bar. Traders who want higher probability wait for a strong breakout with good follow through, and they buy here. So the traders buying here have a better chance of making money than the ones who bought here. However, their stop is down here. So they're risking more, but they're trading off risk reward to get high probability. And traders do that all the time. Some traders like high probability trades, and they have to accept worse risk reward. Other traders are mostly interested in reward, and they don't care if the probability is only 40%. They know that if the reward is two, three, four, five times bigger than the risk, they will make money even if they win only 40% of the time. Now, about bar counting. Traders are always looking for reasons to trade. And there are reasons on every bar to enter. A lot of traders get anxious about entering. How do I buy? You know, why do I buy? What am I waiting for? Well, bar counting is one way to get a method to enter into a trend. For example, here, bulls can use bar counting to enter into pullback entries. The market sold off the pullback and it resumed up. So this is a pullback that resumed up. It sold off again and tried to get up a second time. So this is high one. The first time the bar went above the high of the prior bar. The trend resumed down. This is a high two. The trend resumed down again. This is a high three. And bulls will buy. They'll buy all of these. They'll buy the high one. They'll buy the high two. Not so good. Bear bar. They'll buy the high three. Not so good. Bear bar. They may wait for a micro double bottom here and buy. Rarely, you'll get a high four. Sometimes you'll get as much as a high six. Sometimes you'll have a wedge, a bottom attempt. The market tries to resume up. It breaks to the downside again. And then you get another two or three legs down. So sometimes you'll get a pullback that actually has six legs. In general, if you start getting five or six legs down, you're in a bear trend and no longer in a pullback in a bull trend. If you look at a higher time frame chart, this is a very tight channel. It's probably just one leg down and this is probably a high one. So this is first leg down, pullback, second leg down. So if this is a five minute chart and you looked at a 15 minute chart, this could simply be leg one, pullback, leg two, and a big high two buy. So they buy above this bar. Sometimes you'll hear the expression an ABC correction. Here's the A. First leg down is the A. The pullback from the first leg down is the B. And here's the C. And to me, that's a high two bull flag. So we have a high one, bear trend resumed, and the bull trend tried to resume again, a high two. So it's a buy setup. A, B, C, buy above the high of the C bar, which is a high two bull flag or an ABC bull flag. What you're going to soon discover is that most patterns are not perfect and that is okay. That's just the nature of trading. Nothing is perfect. When traders start out, they always want a perfect trade. Hey, Al, what's that perfect setup? I know you have it and you're not telling me. There is no perfect setup. If I had a perfect setup, institutions would quickly decide that, hey, we're giving Al money every time this pattern happens. Well, guess what? They would stop giving me money. So perfect trades can never exist. So if you're worried about perfect trades and perfect setups, you're never going to trade. The reality is nothing's perfect, but there's a reason to enter on every bar. But you just have to know what to look for. And that's what this entire course is about. I'm trying to show all the different kinds of entries that take place on every bar during the day and then how to manage the trades. So, this is a triangle. A triangle is a pullback that has three legs. So one, pullback two, pullback three. So this is a triangle, three pushes down, horizontal pattern. If it was more angled down, I would call it a wedge. A wedge is just a triangle that's sloped down a little bit or sloped up a little bit. It can be sloped up a lot or sloped down a lot. But if it's three pushes and it's mostly horizontal, I call it a triangle. And you can see the three pushes down. And we have a bull buy signal bar above the third push down. It reversed up. Traders will buy with a stop one tick or one pip above the high of that bar. So they get long there, stop here, and they would ride the trend up. Here we have a bull trend and we have a pullback. This pullback ends when a bar goes above the high of that bar. So this is the end of that pullback. Sometimes you'll get more pullback, a second or a third leg down. But this pullback ends as soon as a bar goes above its high. And traders will buy that as a high one bull flag, especially given that this is a very tight bull trend. It's about a nine bar bull micro channel. Every low is at or above the low of the prior bar. This is the first pullback in nine bars. Very strong bull trend. So traders will either buy with limit orders at this low or they'll buy with a stop just above that bar, get filled here. Or they'll even buy closes or they'll simply buy at the market. Every one of these bars, every instant that this is forming, there's a reason to enter. If you're nervous about entering at the market or on the close, well, then you take a pullback entry, a bar counting entry. We pull back, you buy above the high of the pullback bar. Stop down here. Stop down here. And I said a few minutes ago that sometimes you get a second or third leg down. But if you start to get four or five legs down, you're probably not in a pullback. You're probably in a bear trend. In a bear trend, a pullback ends when the trend resumes down. So here we have a pullback. This bar went above that bar. This pullback ends as soon as a bar goes below the low of that bar. The pullback can fail. We can go up for a second or a third leg and maybe form a wedge, bear flag, and then resume down. But this is a reasonable short, especially with these two big bear bars. So a fairly strong bear trend. A lot of times, most of the time, the low one will be profitable. Now, if the pullback grows, if you start to get three or four consecutive bull bars, you're probably in a bull trend. If you get two or three or four legs up, you're probably in a bull trend. So sometimes the pullback can grow into a reversal and no longer be a pullback. Here we've got a pullback above this bar. And then we've got another pullback here. But once you start to get, you know, here we have five bars with full bodies all closing near their highs. This is probably a reversal and the market's probably always in long. So this is no longer a pullback in a bear trend. It's now a bull swing, possibly a bull trend. I've already talked some about bar counting and I'm going to talk more about it now. With bar counting, I count the number of attempts a trend tries to resume. So here we pullback, trend tries to resume. Here we pullback, trend tries to resume. Here we pullback, try to resume. Pullback, try to resume. Each attempt at resumption in a bear trend usually has a bear bar. So here's, we've got a pullback and then a bear bar. We have a pullback and then a bear bar. Bear trend trying to resume. Bear trend trying to resume. Trying to resume. Successfully resuming. So the bear bars are the attempts at trend resumption down. So we try to resume here. We try to resume here. We pullback once. Pullback twice. Pullback three times. So this in fact is a wedge bear flag. So the number of attempts the market makes to resume is also the same as the number of legs up in the pullback. Leg up, a pullback, resumption down. Leg up, resumption down. Leg up, resumption down. Leg up, each leg in a bear trend has one or more bars. Each leg in a bear flag usually has one or more bull bars. So here we have two bull bars and this is a bear flag in this bear trend. Here's bear trend resumption. And here we have many bull bars in this pullback. This is a weak rally. It's probably a bear flag. Bear flag and you can see the trend resumed. And a bull trend, if the high of the next bar goes above the high of the current bar, then the current bar becomes the buy signal bar. So here we have a bull trend and a pullback. And then the bull trend resumes here. This is the buy signal bar. This is what signals traders to place orders to get long. They place a buy stop one tick or one pip above the high of that bar. And then they get long here. And this becomes a high one bull flag or a high one buy signal bar or a high one reversal. So this bar is a buy setup. It's a high one bull flag. The first attempt down immediately reversed up. It could have a second or third leg down and become a high two or a high three bull flag. That's the buy signal bar. And that's the high one entry bar for the bulls. The high one, when it triggers, it ends the first leg of a sideways to down move. So you have a bull trend. You have a high one buy signal bar. And then when a bar goes above that bar, that ends the first leg down. It may be the only leg down, but it ends the first leg down. Here we got a new breakout. So we start the count over again. Here we have a bear bar. So we have a pullback and it's a high one bull flag. Traders will buy either above the bear bar or above the bull bar. Stop down here. And then it immediately reversed down again. So this becomes the second attempt to resume the trend. So this is a high two bull flag. You can call this a high one or a new high one. You can call it a high two. You can call this a high three. So one push down, two pushes down, three pushes down. A wedge bull flag. Or you can say, we've got a new high. So let's start the count over again. This is a high one and that's a high two. Here, this high one. We tried to get a resumption up from a double bottom. This low, that low. We have a double bottom. You can call it a high one. First pullback from a new high. You can call it a high two. Because we're in a tight trading range. So we tried to resume up. Went sideways. Tried to resume up again. You're looking for reasons to buy. You're in a bull trend with no credible top. So the first attempt to resume up makes this a high one. Again, you can call it a high two. Doesn't matter. You're looking for reasons to buy. Let's say we got a new high, a pullback. So a high one buy. And the next occurrence of a bar going above the high of the prior bar is a high two. So we tried to resume up. We failed. We went down again. And this becomes a high two buy signal bar. And this becomes a high two entry bar because it went above the high of that bar. Here we have a bull trend with many examples. This bar went above that bar. A high one. But the pullback continued. So we have a high two. We tried to resume up. We pulled back. High one. We pulled back a little bit here. This high is below that high. Resumption. High one. Or you could say we just went sideways. So it's a high two. Anytime there's a double bottom, it's a high two buy. This we reversed down. It went below the low of that bar and then went outside up. So this is in fact a high one buy signal bar. The market went below the bar and then above. A new high. New pullback. High one. High one. New high. Same thing here. Tried to reverse down. So the high of that bar is where bulls enter. They buy one tick above that bar. Sideways. A double bottom. So a high two. Now a high three. When it's sideways, it's a triangle. A pullback that's sloped downward, it's a wedge. And here, this is mostly sideways. It does not look at all like a triangle. Here we went above that bar. High one. This one above here. High two. This one above there. High three. So you can call it a tight trading range. You can call it a bull flag. You can call it a high three. You can call it a triangle. It doesn't matter. You're looking for reasons to get long. And all of those are reasons. You can buy above the high one, above the high two, above the high three. Any of them is fine. Stop is down here. The whole purpose of bar counting is to look for reasons to enter a trade. You're trying to come up with a logical reason to enter a trade. Every double bottom is a high two. Very strong bull trends will have a high one, and then another high one, and then another one. Sometimes you'll get four, five, or six high ones in the same bull trend without a high two or a high three. That is very unusual. Because trends tend to weaken as time goes on. So maybe you get one or two high ones, and then you start to get high twos or high threes. This is an example where we've had five or six consecutive high ones. This is just very unusual. This is a good example. After each strong breakout to a new high, you raise the stop. So when it breaks to a new high, stop is here. A good breakout bar here. Stop is now below that pullback bar. Here are the stops. Every time you get a new high, not so much here. But at this point, the stop is now here. New breakout here. New breakout here. New breakout here. Pretty good bull trend. About eight or nine consecutive bull bars. Most of them closing near their highs. You need to get long. Many ways to get long. You can buy below bars. You can buy bull closes. You can buy the market. If you want an easy to learn system, you look to buy high one, high two bull flags, high three bull flags. Three big bear bars closing on their lows. Maybe you don't want to buy the high one. Chances are big up, big down, big confusion. We're going to go sideways and we'll probably get a double bottom. You can buy here, stop down here, or you can wait to buy the high two. And a high two doesn't have to be one leg down, pullback, and a deeper leg down. Sometimes the second leg is above the first leg and it's just a sideways pullback. It's still an ABC pullback or high two bull flag. They're betting on bull trend resumption. That's why you're buying above these pullbacks. Here, double bottom. Double bottoms are rarely perfect. This is a double bottom as well. So this is a high two bull flag. But with the three bear bars, I would rather wait for a second entry. So we have a new double bottom, a higher low double bottom with a bull bar. To me, that's a pretty good bet that the market is going to go up. Now, we've got a little pullback here, an implied one. This low does not go below that low. So on a smaller timeframe chart, this is a pullback. And you could call it a high one, high two, or you could say three pushes down. One, two, three, and a sideways pullback. And it's therefore a triangle. A triangle is just three pushes down and a pullback that is mostly sideways. There are lots of ways to label bull flags and bear flags and a bear trend. It doesn't matter. Don't lose sight of the goal. You're trying to find a reason to enter. And bar counting gives you one way to do that. Now, bulls also count the number of bear bars that are followed by bull bars. Bear bar, doji. So that's one little pullback. Bear bar, doji, another little pullback. And then a new low, another pullback. Here, a pair of bear bars, pullback, and then a bull bar. A series of bear bars and then a bull bar. So to me, this is one leg down and then an inferred end of that leg. And then more bear bars, bull bar, inferred end of the second leg, and then a third leg down here. Same with over here. Bear bar and then a bull bar. So that's one leg down. So I would call this second leg down and then bull bars. And then another good bear bar. So third leg down. We have a high one bull flag here, a double bottom, so high two. And now we have three pushes down. One and then a bull bar. Two and then a bull bar. And then a third push down. These are dojis, but then we get the bull bar here. You can call this a triangle. You can call it a wedge. It's sloped down somewhat. It doesn't matter. You got a decent bull trend. You have about seven or eight or nine bar bull micro channel. So you assume the market's going to resume up and you're looking for reasons to buy. And counting the pullbacks gives you a reason. Here we went down and then a bull bar. Another bear bar and a bull bar. This is a high two buy above this bull bar. You could buy above this bear bar as well. It's a strong enough breakout. We're probably going at least a little higher. You can also count the number of buy signal bars. Here's a buy signal bar. It triggered. A buy signal bar. It triggered. And then we broke to the downside. We have a third buy signal bar above this bar. Right? This is the buy signal bar of the entry bar. You can also call this a high three bull flag. Again, strong bull trend. Stop down here. You can buy the high one. You can buy the high two. Or you can buy the high three. You're looking for a reason to get long. Because you believe the trend is strong enough so that it will probably resume. So pullback high one. We got a high one here. Six bar pullback. And then we got an attempt to resume here. So high two and high three. Functionally, it's the same as a wedge. Here we got six bars down and then a rally. And then to a lower high. And then another ten bars down. And on some higher time frame, this is just a large high two buy setup. So high one, pullback. And then a second leg down. And the second leg down is subdivided into three smaller legs. Buying above this bar or above these bars, you can call it a large high two. You can call it a big high two buy setup. So leg one, pullback. And then leg two, I wouldn't buy here because it's a six bar bare micro channel. But maybe buy here. Certainly buy above this bar. When the market's in a bull trend, you're looking for a reason to buy. Because you believe the trend is going to resume. Still a bull trend, looking for a reason to buy. So you want to buy as the market reverses back up. So you buy above a high three or above a high two. And same with here above a high two. Same here. High two, high three, high two. You can buy above any of these high one, high two or high three bars. I mentioned that we have a bear bar, bull bar. So first leg down. Bear bar, bull bar. Second leg down. Bear bar, doji. So third leg down. So you can call this a triangle. It's sloped down somewhat. You can call it a wedge bull flag. You can call it a high three. In any case, a high three, a wedge, you're looking to buy. Either above the doji or higher probability above a bull bar that closes on its high. So you get long over here. This is a wedge top. One, two, three. You can call it a low three top. Usually, if you're in a trading range, and this might in fact be a trading range. It did turn out to be a trading range. If it's in a trading range, I would call it a low three. At this point, this is all that I see. I think it's a bull trend. So yes, it's three pushes up. One, two, three. On a higher timeframe chart, it might be simply a low three rally in a trading range, but I don't see that. So for me, I would simply call it a wedge. Three pushes up. One, two, three. And look to sell a reversal down. Expecting a couple of legs down. One, pull back, two. Bears will sell the reversal down. Now, I said anytime you have a double top, it's a low two. So you can call it a double top. You can call it a lower high, major trend reversal. Full trend, bear breakout, lower high. You can call it a low two in a trading range. You're thinking that after a wedge channel, we're going to enter a trading range. This is a double top. Every major trend reversal top is a double top. Sometimes the second high is below the first. Sometimes it's exactly the same. Sometimes it's a higher high. But all major trend reversals are types of double tops. So you sell the reversal down below the bear bar. Three pushes down. Even though this rally went above this, the start of the pullback, it's still a wedge. So one push down, two pushes down, three pushes down. Or other computers will say, hey, this is the first push down. We have a lower high here and second push, third push. Different computers do it different ways. I would say that this is part of the pullback. Even though we went to a new high in the bull trend, I think this is part of this pullback. So it's a wedge bull flag where the top of the pullback is above the top of the bull trend. And computers, many computers treat it that way. And they look to buy a resumption up. Sometimes a bull trend or a trading range will have big legs down. And sometimes the legs subdivide. Here, high one, second leg, high two. Or maybe this is a high one and this is a second leg up. Doesn't matter if you call this a high one, high two, high three. In general, with a strong leg down like that and a strong leg up like this, I would view this as a large high two. So first leg down subdivided. So high one and then high two. Here you have a second entry buy. After four bear bars, a lot of bulls will not buy that. They'll wait for a second entry buy. And you can call it a high four. We attempted the bottom here. A complex bottom. One pullback two. So it's complex. The bull tried to resume but failed to get a new high. The bear resumed down. The correction resumed down. And then we got another complex buy. High one, high two. So you can call it high one, high two. And then high three, high four. So this is a high four bull flag. Or you can call it consecutive bottoms. Where you have a high one, high two. And then another high one, high two. This is a second attempt to reverse this large pullback in this bull trend. And second attempts usually are higher probability. So it's a high four bull flag or consecutive bottoms. Now, I said earlier that if you start getting high fives and high sixes, you're probably in a bear trend. Once you get another bear breakout like this, you're probably either in a bear leg and a trading range or in a bear trend. You can call it a high five, but I usually don't use the term high five. I stop counting and stop looking to buy pullbacks in a bull trend. And I start looking to sell rallies in a bear trend. We have a bear trend, a six bar or five bar bear micro channel. No pullbacks. And then we have a pullback. And you can see this bar went below the low of that bar. So the bear trend is resuming. That makes this the low one sell signal bar. And this is the low one entry bar. So it's a low one bear flag or a low one reversal, a low one sell signal. So this is the signal bar and this is the entry bar. Now we've got a bear trend and we have a low one sell. That ends the first leg in the pullback. It may be the end of the entire pullback, but sometimes the pullback will continue and you get a second leg. And I count the number of times that the bear trend resumes. So resumed here. So a low one. And then when this goes below that, it's a low two sell signal. Still going down. A new bear breakout. So I start the count over again. This becomes a low one. A sideways pullback. This becomes a low two. A low two sell signal. You can call it a low one again. You can say we have a new low and it's a low one. In general, when I see a double top, I call it a low two. But you got to be careful here because we're three pushes down. One, two, three, and a pretty good bull reversal and a bad looking sell signal bar. So I personally would not take that sell. So first push up, second push up. So low one bear flag, low two bear flag. This is still a lower high. So it still can be a pullback from this bear trend. It could be simply a bull leg in a trading range. In either case, you can count. So low one and then another attempt to pull back. So low one and then another leg up. An attempt to reverse and then another leg up. So we have three pushes up. One, two, three. This is a low two that did not trigger. And this would be a low three. And this would be a low three sell signal. Wedge top. One, two, three. Also a large low two. It's a double top bear flag. It's below this high and it's a double top. So that is a reasonable sell signal. Either as a double top bear flag, a wedge bear flag, or three pushes up, a low three in a trading range. In this video, I talked about what a pullback is. It's a pause or a minor reversal in a trend where the probability is the trend will resume. I also talked about bar counting, which is the number of times within a pullback that the market tries to reverse before the trend resumes. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of three videos on pullbacks and bar counting. This is afterwards of a install of a grain map. Deltaze Aet Owens and rends the entire feed. Let me hear about this foricosia! Now I'll give it a remember my descendant. Never. I'll give I a boy a cow. accompaniment. I will give it aре in or sample to the earth. Nothing crazy happens. I tell you what this is. I choose about by a kilometre. My dog program contains another azale— I will run to the end of forma as the prejudiceевus.