 I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of five videos on climaxes. I want to make an important point about climaxes being influenced by option selling firms, or not always entirely caused by bears. Finally, I'll talk about consecutive climaxes that fail. We have a series of sell climaxes. A lot of this selling is caused by institutions believing the market's going to go down. A lot of it is caused by institutions that have long positions and they think the market's going down and they're liquidating their longs. They're selling out of longs. Some institutions specialize in selling options. For example, a lot of funds buy puts to protect their stocks against low prices. They're stocks against losses. If the market goes down and they're holding a put, if they're long a put, the put will go up in value offsetting the losses that they get from their stocks. They're institutions that specialize in selling options. That's all they do is they sell options. The value of the put increases as the stock goes down. Or in this case, let's say we're talking about the spider or an ETF, the SPY or the stock market in general. If the underlying is going down, the stock is going down, the value of the put increases. But it's not proportional. The rate of increase of the put is called the delta. And as the market falls further and further, the value of the put accelerates upward. Its value increases faster than the market is falling. And as a result, those institutions that specialize in selling puts have losses that are accelerating as the market falls. Gamma is a measure of how fast the delta is changing. You don't need to know this. But as the market is falling, what's happening is the delta is increasing rapidly. The puts are increasing rapidly faster than the market is falling. The result is those option selling firms are getting a lot of losses. Those puts that they sold are rapidly increasing in value. Those option firms don't want to lose money. They can't buy back their puts. They don't have control over that. What they can do instead is sell the underlying to offset the losses in the puts. As the market's falling, those option selling firms are losing money. The puts are increasing in value. They sold those puts. The firms that bought those puts are making money. The option selling firms need to do something to control their losses. Let's say this is the spider or the stock market. What those firms will do is sell stock or sell the spider or sell the underlying. And the result is those option selling firms are trying to reduce their losses by selling the underlying. If they sold puts against the stock market, there are many different ways to do that. They need to sell stock to offset the losses that they're getting with their puts. When you start to get sell climaxes, a lot of that is due to option selling firms selling the underlying, selling the stock market, to try to offset the losses that they're getting in their puts. Those firms are not bearish. They don't care. They don't care. They don't care if the market's going up or down. All they care about is whether they can make money by selling puts and selling calls. If a market has a series of sell climaxes like this, part of the selling is from firms selling stock because they're no longer as bullish as they were. And part of the selling is due to option selling firms hedging their losses in their short puts by selling the underlying, by selling stocks. When you see a very severe series of sell climaxes, sometimes the sell off can be 50% caused by option selling firms hedging their puts. When you have a series of sell climaxes like this, it's not necessarily as bearish as it appears. Again, the option selling firms, they're not bearish or bullish. They just know that if the market is falling, they have to sell stock. And that means that maybe half of a severe sell climax is caused by option selling firms hedging their short puts. They're not bearish. So half of the sell off could be caused by institutions that are not bearish at all. And therefore, consecutive sell climaxes often is far less bearish than what you think. So the market is going down. The puts are increasing in value. The firms that sold those puts are losing money. The easiest way to hedge their losses, reduce their losses, is to sell the underlying stocks or futures. And that results in increased selling, more sell climaxes. Again, as much as 50% of a sell climax or series of sell climaxes can be caused by institutions hedging their short puts rather than by traders being bearish. So consecutive sell climaxes often is not as bearish as you'd think. You have to wait until the sell climax is over and see what happens. If it's truly bearish, the market will continue down. If it's not as bearish as you think, and if it's due in large part due to option selling firms hedging, the market will either go sideways or go up. If you see this after a series of sell climaxes, you have to assume the market is not as bearish as you think. And therefore, a lot of the selling was simply hedging by option selling institutions. There's a difference between sell climaxes and buy climaxes. Most stock is being owned by institutions. There are some stock that is held by institutions that are short, but most stock is held by institutions believing the stock will go up. Most of those firms buying want to buy value. They want to buy pullbacks. There are fewer firms willing to buy breakouts at the top of strong rallies. And the result is buy climaxes tend to be less impressive than sell climaxes. Firms who buy puts, for the most part, are firms who own stock and they're still bullish, but they want to protect themselves against losses, against the market going down without selling their stock. Most firms that buy calls are bulls. Firms that buy puts are bulls as well, protecting their long positions. Firms that buy calls are bulls. They're buying calls instead of stock because they want to make a bet that the market's going higher with smaller risk. The firms that sell options, for example, selling calls, they do not have the same rate of gamma increase during buy climaxes as during sell climaxes. Because of the nature of what's going on. And the result is that buy climaxes tend to be less severe as sell climaxes. The firms that sell the calls are not incurring the losses that they do during sell offs from selling puts. And therefore, if the market has a series of buy climaxes, the firms that sell calls are under less pressure to hedge by buying stocks and futures. And the result is they don't add to the climactic buying as much as they add to climactic selling during a sell climax. This means that in general, buy climaxes are not as extreme as sell climaxes because they do not have the contribution from the option selling firms or as much of a contribution. I want to talk a little bit about consecutive climaxes that fail. We have a series of sell climaxes in a bare channel. And you assume 75% chance you'll get a bull breakout, bare channel, bull fly. But sometimes instead you get a bare breakout. In general, if you have a bare breakout below anything where there's a logical stop below, there's a 50-50 chance you'll get a swing down. 50-50 chance the bare breakout will fail and you'll get a reversal up. Bare channel, 75% chance bull breakout or at least sideways and then up. 25% chance you'll get a strong breakout and a swing down. Here we have a strong breakout and decent follow through below a wedge bottom. We have consecutive bare bars closing on or near their lows. And we have that one big bare bar and then a pair of additional bare bars. There's adequate follow through. We're probably going to get at least a small second leg down. Maybe leg one, pull back leg two. Or leg one, pull back and then leg two, the tail on the bottom of that bull bar. Bare breakout below the wedge bottom. Decent follow through. The odds are we're going at least a little bit lower. Very tight channel. We have a breakout. So the market cycle starts over again. You have to assume breakout will be followed by a channel and then by a trading range. Here we've got a very big trading range. Consecutive sell climaxes. You should always think of them as a type of wedge bottom because once you have three or more climaxes, it is a wedge. We have a sell off, a rally, and then we're starting to sell off again. This is a double top bear flag. This is the neckline. So the first target the bears will look for if the breakout is successful is a measure move down based upon this double top bear flag. Whenever there's a breakout, you always have to be thinking about a possible measured move down. It might be from this high and that low, but if it falls below that, then you've got to be thinking about from this high and that low. And traders will look to take profits on their shorts. Bull scalplers will look to start buying around that measured move target. A strong breakout below a wedge bottom is a low probability event. And that means bulls are trapped in. They've been buying lows for scalps all the way down. And here they're buying lows and they're not able to get a profit. They have to sell. And you have bears trapped out. They were not selling at lows. Now they think the market's going lower. They have to sell as well. The likelihood is that you'll get at least a small second leg down. The first reversal up, the trapped bulls will sell out of their longs. And the bears who did not short will sell. They'll sell the high of this bar or below the low of that bar. Here we've got two legs down, but they're very small. That is the minimum though. The minimum is two legs down. Break out, pull back, second leg down. Every trend bar or series of trend bars is a climax. We have a series of cell climaxes here. The bulls are trying to reverse up. They're breaking above a very tight channel. And then we get a very big final cell climax, bigger than all of the others. Whenever you have the biggest cell climax in a bear trend occurring after the bear trend, has gone on 20 or more bars, it's more likely an exhaustive end of the trend rather than a measuring gap leading to a second leg down, a measured move down. And that's what we have here. We have a gap. We have a breakout here, a breakout point. The rally did not go above that breakout point. You have to be thinking the market will fall for a measured move down. Maybe from this high to the breakout point. Maybe from this high to the midpoint of the gap. And we fell to about that level. This breakout probably was simply a cell vacuum test of the measured move target. There probably is other support here as well. The weak bulls finally gave up. The strong bearers look at this and say, wow, I didn't expect that. What a gift. I better buy back my shorts. And the strong bulls look at that and say, wow, that's way overdone. And they know the strong bears will buy back their shorts. The strong bulls start to buy. And the result is you can get a bull channel that can last a long, long time. No one left to sell at this price. 75% chance you'll get 10 bars, two legs sideways to up. One leg, pull back, second leg. Maybe, but a very tight channel, probably going higher. So maybe this is one leg, pull back, second leg. Here we have a bear channel lasting a lot of bars, maybe 40 or 50 bars. If you look at a higher timeframe chart, maybe it's only 20 bars. But in any case, it's a bear channel that's lasting a long time. In general, I'm looking for a 10 bar two-legged correction on the highest timeframe chart that has the same pattern. Let's say this is a five minute chart. You could look at a 10 or 15 minute chart and the pattern might be the same. I'm going to then look for 10 bars, two legs on that 10 or 15 minute chart. In general, the minimum goal is 10 bars, two legs and a rally that lasts about half as many bars that there were in the bear trend. So for example, if you have a bear trend lasting 50 bars, you'd expect a rally that would have two legs and last about 20 or 30 bars. It might last a lot longer here, but that would be the minimum guideline before the bears will start selling again and where the bulls will stop buying. Consecutive sell climaxes. You know, maybe the market will bottom. Sometimes when you have consecutive sell climaxes, you get one final, very big sell climax. And traders look at that and they think, oh, wow, it's accelerating downward and we're probably going down for another measured move. Maybe this will be a measuring gap. Usually not. If the trend has gone on for 20 or more bars and you've had a series of sell climaxes and now you have the biggest sell climax occurring late in the trend, more likely it's going to be an exhaustion gap, a gap between this close and that low. Once you get the reversal up, then the gap is this high to that low. We're probably going to go back above that low. We'll probably reach the top of the final sell climax and then decide whether to go sideways and resume down or break to the upside and go up for a measured move based upon the height of that sell climax. Sometimes it happens that when you get a series of sell climaxes, you need an even stronger sell climax before the market is exhausted and you get a reversal. Experienced traders will often buy that close, betting that the market's probably not going to fall much further. Higher probability to buy above this bull bar or above that bull bar. We have a breakout. A breakout of what? Well, of this low. We tried to bottom here. You're going to be thinking about a possible measured move down based upon the top to the bottom of that leg. This is this bottom attempt and we fell for a measured move down. We also have a very tight channel. Small wedge bottom. Three pushes down. One, two, and three. And we have a bear breakout below it. So there is some support there. We have a reversal up. A bi-climax. And then another bi-climax. This is the biggest bull trend bar in the bull trend that started over here. This is still part of the bull trend. This is still part of the bull trend. Whenever you get the biggest bull bar late in a bull trend, 20 or more bars into the bull trend, you have to be thinking that it could be a climactic end of the trend. It could be a measuring gap this low and that high. Might get a measured move up from here to here or from here to here. But we're about a 50% increase in the bull trend. This is the biggest bull trend bar in the bull trend. This is the biggest bull trend bar in the bull trend that started over here. This is still part of the bull trend. Whenever you get the biggest bull bar late in a bull trend, 20 or more bars into the bull trend, you have to be thinking that it could be a climactic end of the trend. So, here we go, here we go, here we go, here we go, here we go, here we go, here we go, here we go, here we go. But we're about a 50% pullback of the bear trend and we're testing prior lower highs. We're testing the top of this cell climax. Therefore, you're going to be thinking that it could be a bi-vacuum test of resistance and the end of the first leg up. Big bear trend usually evolves into a trading range. And therefore, this could be a second leg trap. Leg one pullback, leg two in a trading range. Eight bar bull micro channel. Actually, more than eight bars. But, you know, maybe 10 bar bull micro channel. Chances are the first reversal down, traders will buy it. Chances are the bears will need at least a micro double top before they can get any kind of a correction. We have a bi-climax, we have a bi-climax. Sometimes you have to get an even stronger bi-climax before there's exhaustion and any kind of a reversal or a pullback. Rather than the bull rally ending here, it had to break above the top of the entire bear trend. The biggest bull trend bar, late in a bull trend, probably an exhaustive end of the trend. You can also call it a parabolic wedge. First leg, pause, second leg, pause, third leg. Or, first leg, second leg, third leg. Different computers see it differently. In any case, we have a bear channel. Probably will evolve into a trading range. And therefore, traders will look for a top of the range. The bears thought they might have had it here for a possible double top. Instead, we broke strongly above it. And we broke above the top of the entire bear trend. However, the biggest bull trend bar, late in a bull trend, especially at the top of what could be a trading range, it's probably an exhaustive end of the trend. We broke above that high, but closed below that high. The bulls are taking profits. They saw this bar as a gift. At this point, we have a 13 bar bull micro channel. 13 bars without a pullback. And it's followed by a bear bar and then a second bear bar. A bear eye-eye pattern. Bulls will sell below here if they didn't already sell out. And bears will sell as well, looking for at least a scalp down. This is unsustainable behavior. The biggest bull bar, late in a bull trend, testing the top of what could be a trading range, testing the prior high. Probably a buy vacuum test of resistance and probably an exhaustive end of this rally. Anything that is unsustainable is usually climactic and usually results in an end of the trend. 10 bars, two legs, sideways to down at a minimum. Again, different ways to look at this as a parabolic wedge, using these highs or this high and then that high. Consecutive buy climaxes. A severe buy climax. Minimum goal, 10 bars, two legs, sideways to down before the bulls will buy again. Here we're sideways to about 30 bars. Then the probability of trend resumption up falls to the same as the probability for trend reversal down. Buy climax ended with a tight trading range. The market's in breakout mode. Here we have a double top within the tight trading range. That is a double top lower high. Here's the high. Double top lower high in a tight trading range. It's a double top lower high major trend reversal. 40% chance if we fall below that bar, we'll get two legs down. One pull back, two. Bulls and bears will sell this close. They see consecutive buy climaxes. They see the biggest bull bar. They see this close below that high. Some bears and bulls will sell here. The bulls sell out of their longs to take profits. The bears sell looking for 10 bars, two legs sideways to down. And those who do not sell here will sell here. We have a bear II pattern. Two bear bars. This one closing on its low. At a minimum, we'll probably get 10 bars, two legs sideways, maybe down. If you want, you can also call this a triangle. We have three reversals up. One, two, three. Double top lower high here. Double top lower high here. 50% chance we'll get a bear breakout. 40% chance we'll get two legs down for a swing down, which we did. Traders who do not want to take the early short below this bar or below that bar have a higher probability of selling after they see two or three decent bear bars. They can either sell the close, sell below this pullback bar, or sell below the low of this pullback bar. A double top this high and that high. Low one, low two. I talked about climaxes are due to extreme behavior, extreme selling for sell climax, extreme buying for buy climax. However, a big component of the climax can be due to option selling firms losing money and having to offset their losses by taking positions in the underlying. So if the market is rallying strongly, their calls that they sold are losing money. They have to buy the underlying. If the market's selling off in a series of sell climaxes, the puts that they sold are losing money and they have to sell the underlying stocks or ETFs. And then finally, I talked about consecutive climaxes that fail. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks trading course. This is the fifth of five videos on climaxes. I'm now going to have a friend. Check it out. In this case, add Muchas, kirjoice phone rings on BILL. Now hit me for a while. Here at the middle of the time axis. Please don't like one and add an Abus, Reform, Reform. abs and there. Click 9370 and extra 8600ambods in his device. asteroid updating imaxes. and use the 958, War remon missed the flash accol�ci Katie editing course. And again here with Clair. Need some casino perks on zero. And I'm going to have to buy three Olha batteries in foutas and get to get an audacio for times. Now here's myいます, search for my year presence here. Now hit luck in 3 verticals.