 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on Head and Shoulders Patterns. I think it's important to understand that every Head and Shoulders Pattern is a major trend reversal. Not all major trend reversals are Head and Shoulders Patterns because not all major trend reversals have a left shoulder. Most Head and Shoulders reversals are minor and lead to trading ranges rather than an actual reversal of a trend. I'm continuing down the list of major reversal patterns. When I talk about a major reversal, I'm talking about a reversal that leads to at least 10 bars and 2 legs and a move that is probably 2, 3, 4 times bigger than a minimum scalp. To get a major reversal, usually the pattern that leads to the reversal has to be fairly big. You can get it with 5 big bars or 10 small bars, sometimes 20 small bars. When you enter after a major reversal setup, you have about a 40% chance of a swing trade, 60% chance that you'll have either a small loss or a small win. When a market is trying to form a major reversal, it usually has to have an initial reversal, in this case a rally in a bear trend, to demonstrate that the bulls are reasonably strong. And then the market needs to reverse up a second time. The size of the reversal, usually you need at least 5 or 10 bars in each of the two legs. You can have simply one bar if it's big enough, but most reversal patterns have 5 or 10 bars in the first leg and 5 or 10 bars in the second leg as well. The reversal up in that bear trend, the first reversal up, traders call it a left shoulder. They see the bear trend resume. If it reverses up again, they then refer to that as a head. The bear trend tries to resume again, and if the market reverses up a third time, they look at that and describe it as a right shoulder. The pattern, you can argue, is a lower low major trend reversal followed by a higher low major trend reversal. The head often is not quite a good enough pattern to be called a lower low major trend reversal. For example, here, is this enough of a rally so that traders will look at this as a major reversal? Not necessarily. This is probably more of a minor reversal. We have about 5 or 6 bars up, not all that big. And then we have 30 bars down, which is undoing a lot of what the bulls did here. We have another reversal up here. This is stronger than that one. We have a couple bigger bars. And now we have a sell-off that lasts about 5 or 10 bars, a couple legs down, one pull back two, and a micro double bottom. Traders are more inclined to trade this as a major reversal pattern. The fewer bars that are in the pattern, the more likely the reversal will be minor. For example, if you get a reversal up in a bear trend and it's not all that strong, if you look at this as a potential high or low, it's probably a minor reversal that will lead to either a bear flag or a trading range. In other words, it'll probably be followed by at least a leg down. We have a strong rally, a reversal attempt, minor, a pullback and a bull flag. And then we have a very strong bull bar. It's probably going to be an exhaustion gap. So the space between this close and this high will probably close. And it did. When traders see this and then they see another reversal attempt up here, they begin to wonder if the market is in the process of forming a major trend reversal. The market sold off here. This big bear bar erased much of this big bull bar. The market tried to reverse up on this bar. It reversed down. It tried to reverse up again a second time. And now we have a small double top. Down, up, down, up. And on a smaller timeframe chart, this would be a good looking head and shoulders top. On this particular chart, there are just not enough bars in the pattern. This sell off is only a bar or two. This rally is only a few bars. This sell off is only a few bars. When I look at this, the odds are it's a minor reversal and it will be followed by a trading range. But sometimes a minor reversal will lead to a swing trade. Meaning at least 10 bars and two legs as it did here. And a reward that is at least twice as big as the actual risk. Another reversal attempt here. Only a few bars. Trend resumption here. Only a few bars. Another reversal attempt here. This is probably a minor reversal. We have a bear trend. A small bull breakout. And therefore, this is probably not going to be a lower low major trend reversal. And you can call this an attempt to resume the bear trend. A double top bear flag. But the entire pattern has too few legs in all of the bars. And therefore, instead of this being a major reversal up into a bull trend, it's probably a minor reversal into a trading range or a bear flag. We have two legs up, one pulled back two. So it's a low two bear flag. It's also a double top bear flag. And we have a micro double top here. And a second entry short here. A resumption of the bear trend. But it became a trading range. As is the case with all swing trade setups, the earliest entry has low probability. But it has lower risk as well. For example, if you buy above this micro double bottom, you might put your stock below. So your risk is small. And the potential reward is very big. In other words, excellent risk reward ratio. And that always has to come with low probability. The probability of a swing trade in general is 40% for any major trend reversal. You always hear about necklines. Head and shoulders top necklines. Is the neckline drawn across the two rallies? The one from the left shoulder and the one from the head? A lot of computers will say yes. Other computers will say, well, the lower high is more important. So the breakout is there. Others will say, well, the whole thing is a trading range. It's not going to be a bull trend unless it breaks above the entire trading range. Every head and shoulders pattern is a trading range. And the breakout of the head and shoulders pattern is a trading range breakout. Different computers use different lines and they enter at different times. It doesn't matter which entry you take if you're looking to buy. The initial entry is a reversal in a trading range. Maybe a 40% chance you're going to get a swing out of it. If you want higher probability, you wait for a strong breakout. We have a breakout here. We have a follow through here. We have a follow through here. So start buying closes. Either this close or that close. Another breakout. This close or that close. Buying those closes has a higher probability of making a profit. But your stop is further away here or here. And that's always the case. Whenever you wait and take a higher probability trade, your stop is going to be further away and there's going to be less profit remaining. There's a trade off. If you want high probability, your risk reward ratio will be worse. If you want to take a trade with lower risk, you're taking the earlier entry, you're probably going to lose most of the time or not make much money most of the time. However, the math is just as good. If you take 100 entries like this or 100 entries like that, your total profit will be about the same. Again, a major trend reversal is usually part of a trading range. A head and shoulders bottom is certainly a trading range. And most entries from major trend reversals result in more trading range. 40% of the time, you get a swing up. Head and shoulders bottom. We have a bear trend and we have a break above the bear trend line. I could have drawn the trend line like this and said this is the break above the trend line. And then call this a lower low major trend reversal. However, as I said, this is not very much buying pressure. And this is a lot of trend resumption down. This is a better looking rally. So, I would call this the break above the bear channel. And once I see that, I'm going to look for a test back down, a resumption of the bear trend, and see if that resumption fails and reverses up. Bear trend, bull break above the channel, and the bear trend is resuming. I want to see if it's going to reverse up a second time. Instead of getting a new low, we have a higher low. It's a higher low major trend reversal. And we have a very strong reversal up. The market became always in long, probably on the close of this bar. That means chances are we're going higher. Every head and shoulders bottom is a higher low major trend reversal. You have a bear trend, a bull breakout, and a higher low. Some higher low major trend reversals do not have a left shoulder. Therefore, many higher low major trend reversals are not additionally head and shoulders bottoms. But every head and shoulders bottom is a higher low major trend reversal. The bulls buy the reversal up from the higher low, hoping it's the first of many higher lows, and therefore a bull trend. Some traders will look to buy this as a lower low major trend reversal. In other words, they're anticipating a possible head and shoulders bottom, and they'll buy the reversal up from the head. Which is okay. You've got a bunch of tails below the bars, a tight trading range. It looks like the momentum down is waning, and it's okay. It's a low probability bet, but the math is still okay because the potential reward is much better than the risk. Most head and shoulders bottoms, traders, traders looking for head and shoulders bottoms, they look to buy the reversal up from the right shoulder. Major trend reversal bulls will buy that same entry because they see the pattern as a higher low major trend reversal, which it is. Traders enter above that bull bar or above this micro double bottom, two legs down, bear bar, dojis, bear bars, and then a micro double bottom, and a higher low. The bulls see this as a breakout above the bear channel, and this as a two-legged pullback from that breakout, and it formed a higher low. This is the start of the rally, and this is a two-legged pullback, a high two bull flag, and they buy, hoping for a bull trend. We have a bull trend here. You can see a potential head and shoulders top. If I draw the trend line like this, this is the break below the trend line. The bars are not big, but there are a lot of bear bars. Pretty good selling pressure. Traders will then look at the next attempt to resume the bull trend, and they'll look to sell a reversal down. You can call it a wedge, lower high. A pair of bull bars, a bear bar. Another bull bar, bear bar. Has four little pushes up interrupted by bear bars, and they'll sell below the low of the prior bar. Some will look to sell below this bar, no fill. And then sell below this bar, or below that bear bar, and they got filled. You can draw a tighter bull trend line like this, but it's really not a good parallel. You can see there's an obvious top to the channel. Traders would rather have a channel that is made of parallel lines. Drawing a tighter bull channel like this, or a tighter bull trend line like that, and calling this a possible top, you know, most traders would not consider it major. We have three pushes up, one, two, three, but a lot of big bull bars relative to the number of bear bars. Probably a minor reversal only into a bull flag in higher prices. And the same with this. If I were to look at this as the bull trend, and this is the bear breakout, the bear breakout is small. It's a higher low. This is probably not going to be a major reversal. If you look at this as a higher high major trend reversal, it's probably minor, and it probably will lead to a trading range instead of a bear trend. We have a break far below the bull channel, and this channel is fairly parallel. I have the trend line drawn in. I do not have the trend channel line drawn in, but it's a fairly parallel channel. Therefore, traders will look at this as a significant reversal. Even though it's mostly sideways, it has a lot of bear bars and an endless pullback. So, pretty good selling pressure. Enough so that when the bull trend resumes, a lot of the bears will be prepared to sell a reversal down. They'll sell below the low of the prior bar after at least a couple of legs up. Instead of getting a new high, we reverse down strongly. It's a lower high major trend reversal. And because there's a left shoulder, you can also call it a head and shoulders top. Traders will sell the reversal down here. The probability is not all that high, but the risk reward ratio is good. A lot of potential reward, not much risk. Stop either above this bar or above that bar. And then, now we have a pullback from the initial breakout. Traders will also sell this as well, even though the market simply entered a tight trading range here. Traders see this lower high as a pullback from this bear breakout. It's therefore a breakout pullback short. We have a bear breakout below a bull channel. And this is a pullback to a lower high. Some traders will sell below that, simply looking at it as a pullback from the bear breakout below the bull trend line. Other traders don't put that much thought into it and they just say, oh, head and shoulders top. I'm looking to sell. Higher high major trend reversal. Higher high major trend reversal. Both are really minor. We're still in the bull channel and the selling is not significant. This is probably a minor reversal. It's a higher high minor reversal. So it probably will lead to a trading range instead of a bear trend. You can say the bear trend began here and it did. That's always the case when you have a successful major trend reversal. The swing down begins at the head. However, it did not clearly become bearish until we got this bear bar and then this big bar. It closed at its high, but it still was a sell off from this high to that low and just two bars. So that's a big sell off. This is where it clearly became bearish. This is a reasonable swing short looking for a couple legs down. This might be two legs down. One pullback to the channel is so tight. A lot of traders would view this as the first leg. A complex first leg, but the first leg. And is this the second leg? It's a small second leg. The market went sideways. Most traders would exit somewhere in here. Again, every head and shoulders top is a lower high major trend reversal. A lot of the head and shoulders top traders will not be looking at the top. They will not be looking to sell until they see this rally to a lower high and then they'll sell the reversal down. And that's exactly where the major trend reversal traders would sell as well. This is not a major reversal. It turned out that it was the high of a bear trend, but this was a major reversal. This is a minor reversal leading to a trading range. And then this lower high is a major reversal setup. It led to a strong reversal down. It's a major reversal. It's a major reversal. It's a major reversal. It's a major reversal. It's a major reversal. Most head and shoulders reversals are minor. And they lead to trading ranges instead of opposite trends. And head and shoulders patterns are common if you know what to look for. Here are hundreds and hundreds of bars on this chart. And the chart contains many head and shoulders patterns. If you look at the chart and try to find them, and you look hard and you know what to look for, they're all over the place. Small head and shoulders top, small head and shoulders bottom, left shoulder, head, right shoulder, left shoulder, head, right shoulder, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. And then you've nested patterns. You've got a big left shoulder, head, right shoulder. And within it, there are smaller head and shoulders tops. You've got a big left shoulder, a big head, and then possibly right shoulder here. here. Did all of these reversals lead to major reversals? No, they just led to more sideways trading. Most head and shoulders patterns are minor reversals and they lead to trading ranges. On a smaller time frame chart, any of these reversals can be major. And if you sell this head and shoulders top, the move is big relative to the size of the pattern and the bars to the left. A lot of these are major on a smaller time frame chart. On this chart, they're all minor. On this chart, you're scalping them if you're trading them at all. As I said, you got a head and shoulders top here. Unless there's a break beyond a major channel, the reversals are going to be minor. If the market's still within the channel and you're getting a head and shoulders pattern, it's probably going to be minor and the trade will probably not break below the channel or break above the channel. We have a bear trend, a pretty good rally, and then another strong breakout. Any reversal, buying here, here, here, here, they're all minor. Until the bulls have a very strong rally and can demonstrate that they have the ability to take control of the market, any of the reversals prior to that are minor. If you're looking to buy a major reversal, if you want a chance of a reversal from a bear trend to a bull trend, you usually have to wait until there's some evidence that the bulls are strong. You need a breakout, a strong breakout, preferably above the bear trend line. And bulls will buy the reversal up from this higher low or from this double bottom higher low. It's a double bottom and it's a higher low. Here's the low of the bear trend and we have a double bottom higher low. Within this rally, there are many head and shoulder stops. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder, left shoulder, head, right shoulder, and then a smaller left shoulder, head, right shoulder. All of them are minor. Unless you break below the bottom of the bull channel, any reversal is probably going to be a minor reversal that will simply test the bottom of the channel. You need some evidence that the bears are strong. You need a break below the bull trend. Here, the market broke below the bull channel. I have the trend line drawn here. I could have drawn it here as well. And this could be the start of the break. It doesn't matter. We clearly are breaking below the bull channel. Traders want to see what happens once the bulls try to resume the trend. Will the bulls be successful or will they fail around the prior high? And they'll look to sell a reversal down. They could sell below these bars. Probably buy back the shorts here. We have a double bottom bull flag. And then another failure up here. They'll sell below there. And then another double top here. They'll sell below here. A lot of times when you're taking major trend reversal trades, the first entry does not go far and you end up scalping out. However, if you're willing to continue to try, eventually you can get a pretty good swing trade. Again, you need a strong break below the trend line. Here, I can draw a trend line using this low and those lows. I can create a parallel channel and create a line. I can draw a trend line like this. In any case, this line looks like it's capturing most of what the market is trying to do. And this might be an outlier. We've got a very strong reversal down here. The bull trend might be transitioning into a trading range. This strong sell-off fell below any bull trend line that I would draw. And it also is starting to fall below these lows. And therefore, if the market tries to resume back up, traders will look to sell a reversal down. Different ways to call this a left shoulder. You can call it a left shoulder here. You can call this a left shoulder, subdividing into a head and shoulders top. You can call this whole thing the head. Doesn't matter. You're getting an attempt to resume the bull trend. And the bulls keep failing at this general price level. The bears will look to sell for a swing down once we get a break below some trend line. And there are different ways to draw the trend line. Clearly, we're breaking below and we have a very strong sell-off. Bears will look to sell a rally either for a scalp betting on a continued trading range or for a swing betting on the first of many lower highs and a new bear trend. Sell below here. Another lower high here. We have a triangle here. We get a little bear breakout on that gap down and then a lower high. These are swing entries. The probability of getting a swing trade may be 40%. If you take the entry here or any of these entries, your stop is probably above here, maybe even above here. Again, you need a strong break below a bull trend line. I can redraw the line like this and we clearly have a strong break below the trend line. And therefore, if the bulls get an attempt to resume the trend up, bears will look to sell a reversal down from there. A large head and shoulders top, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. We've got a bull trend. Clearly, a break far below the bull trend line. The bulls hope it's a double bottom bull flag and they want the bull trend to resume. Bears will look to sell a reversal down from a lower high. The bears see this rally as a pullback from the breakout below the bull trend line. The bulls see this as a double bottom bull flag. And again, left shoulder, head, strong break below the trend line after the sell-off from the head. And therefore, traders will look to sell the rally as a lower high major trend reversal. Since there's also a left shoulder, you can call it a head and shoulders top as well. Traders might sell this. They might decide this rally is too steep. They might wait for a second entry sell. But bears will be looking for this rally to fail and form a lower high. Traders might find a trend reversal. Whenever there's a major trend reversal, there usually are many reasons to sell. And the more reasons that you see, the more computers will be taking the sell. And that means it's a higher probability that you'll get a swing down. We have a wedge top, three pushes up. And it's around a measured move up. The bears have a double top bear flag, but we've got a bull breakout and a measured move up. We have a failed breakout above the top of a channel. 75% chance you'll get a reversal down to the bottom of the channel. Traders will start to look to sell. Sell below here. Sell below here. We have a small double top. Now we have a double top bear flag. Sell below here. Another double top. Sell below here. You can call it a triangle. And then another lower high here as well. After a strong leg down like this, the bears are betting that they'll get a second leg down to some kind of a measured move. Maybe leg one, pull back leg two. Maybe we'll break below the neckline of this double bottom for a measured move down. Head and shoulders top. Left shoulder. Head. Right shoulder. All of these are right shoulders. Maybe we'll break below the neckline and fall for a measured move down. The bears are now starting to sell. The probability of these shorts leading to a swing trade may be 40%. But the reward is much bigger than the risk. And that more than makes up for the low probability. Leg one. And then pull back leg two. It fell for a little bit more than that. Most reversal patterns, including head and shoulders tops, even when they're successful, usually become big trading ranges instead of opposite trends. We have two legs down. If you want to call it a bear trend, you can. I would call it simply a swing down and the whole thing is part of a trading range. However, even though most major trend reversals, including head and shoulders tops, result in trading ranges, 40% of them result in a move that is a swing trade, which means a reward at least twice as big as the risk, and two legs and 10 or more bars. I began by making the point that every head and shoulders pattern is a major trend reversal. Not all major trend reversals are head and shoulders patterns because not all have a left shoulder. Most head and shoulders reversal patterns are minor. They're too small to lead to a reversal of the trend. They instead lead to either a trading range or a pullback in the trend. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on head and shoulders patterns. the Mike já tic3o. steroids.uedes.