 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading, trading ranges. Just like channels can be tight or broad, trading ranges can also be tight or broad and you trade them differently. I think it's important to look for early signs of what the market might be doing and therefore traders have to be aware of the early signs that a trading range might be forming. Trading ranges can be very broad. They can be very tight. And when they're broad, as they are here, traders can buy for swings. They can sell for swings. They can also scalp. In general, once you think that the market's in a trading range, it's better to look to buy in the lower third and take quick profits, scalp, and sell in the upper third and take quick profits, scalp. A good way to do it is to buy reversals up from near the bottom of the range. This is the second entry for a failed breakout below this low. The first went above this bar. And then now we have a bull bar closing near its high. That's a higher probability entry. Here we have a micro double bottom. We went down on this bear bar. This bar has a bull body, so it went up. This bar has a bear body, so it went down. And now we're going up again. So a micro double bottom. Buy above the bear bar or buy above the bull bar. And now we have a test of this low. So now we have a small double bottom. Traders will buy reversal up. Entering with stops is a good way for traders to trade when they're starting out. In fact, it's the best way for them to trade when they're starting out. The opposite is true at the high. Traders will sell reversals down. A big bull bar late in a trend. An attempt to break above the top of the channel. Likely to fail. Traders will sell a reversal down. Here we have an attempt to break out above a double top. Traders will sell reversal down. This is not ideal because it's more in the middle third of the range. This is a better sell. Testing a prior high. Reverse down with a good bear bar. And now there's another good sell signal bar. A bear bar closing near its low. Good size bear body. Traders will sell with a stop just below the low of that bear bar. Again here, two legs up. One. Pull back two. In the top third of the range, traders will look to sell. Maybe not so much below this bull bar, but maybe below that bear bar or maybe below this bear bar or that bear bar. Experienced traders will enter with limit orders, betting that reversal attempts will fail. For example, here we have four consecutive bull bars, all closing above their mid points. Chances are this is a bad sell signal bar and there'll be more buyers than sellers below the low of the bar. Traders will buy with a limit order at the low of that bar and get filled here. The bears are trying to get a breakout below a channel, just above a prior low. Every breakout attempt here reverses up within a bar or two. Chances are this breakout will reverse up as well. Some traders will buy with a limit order at that low. Many of them are willing to scale in lower. We broke below this low and we pulled back. But the sell signal bar is a doji bar and the breakout is weak. A small bear bar followed by a doji bar. Therefore, this is a bad looking low one bear flag. Probably more buyers below. Traders will buy with a limit order at its low and get filled here. They'll also buy with a limit order at a new low at this low and get filled here. Pairs will be doing the same thing at the top. We have a buy climax breaking above a prior high, breaking above a bull channel. And we have a weak looking buy signal bar. We have a bull doji bar. Traders will sell above the high. Both bars have big tails. Betting that there will be more sellers than buyers up there. Here, in the middle of the range, traders will sell with limit orders above highs, especially when the rally is weak. It looks more like a bull leg in a trading range than the start of a bull trend. Here, the bulls have a great looking bull bar, but it's a big bar. And therefore, traders buying above its high and putting a stop below its low have big risk. And they're buying after two big bear bars at the top of a potential trading range. And therefore, the probability is bad. When that happens, you can get a bull bar, but there probably are going to be more sellers at its high than buyers. Experienced traders will sell with a limit order at that high, betting that the bulls who buy there will lose money. When a trading range is tight, most traders should not trade, especially when it's very tight like this. But experienced traders will trade with limit orders, and they will scalp. Trading ranges often have legs that last 10, 20, 30 bars. And that often is long enough for traders to make a swing trade. A very strong bear reversal. Three consecutive bear bars closing near their lows. And we have a low one short, and now another short. It's a reasonable swing trade, hoping that the market becomes a bear trend. It ended up trading down for another 20 bars or so, but the sell-off was weak. It lacked consecutive big bear bars and had many reversals. It was therefore more likely a bear leg in a trading range. Here, this is a very tight range within a broader range. And when the range is tight like this, I'll talk about tight ranges later on. But when a range is very tight like this, it's very difficult to make money. You're looking for a minimum scalp, maybe one or two points. And it's very difficult to make money when the range is only a little bit bigger than the size of a minimum scalp. Experienced traders will enter with limit orders. Here's a bull bar after three bear bars. They'll buy below the bull bar, betting that it's a bad sell. Here's a bear inside bar near the top of a developing tight trading range. Traders will sell at the high of that bar, betting that it's a bad buy. This is a bull channel. This is a bear channel. And this is a trading range. When the market's in a bull channel, traders try to buy pullbacks into the bottom half of the range. Whether it's a bull channel or a bear channel as well. If it's a broad enough bear channel, traders will look to buy in the bottom half of the range, like below prior lows. And in a bear channel, traders will look to sell in the top half of the range. If the market's in a bull channel and it has pretty deep pullbacks, in other words, a pretty broad channel, traders will look to sell in the top half of the range. In a trading range, rather than simply buying in the bottom half, it's usually better to buy in the bottom third because the market typically retraces very close to the low. The opposite is true at the high. It's usually better to sell in the upper third of the range rather than in the middle third. The middle third of the range, the market tends to spend most of its time in the middle third of the range, briefly breaking in the lower third, briefly breaking in the upper third. But this is the best place to sell and this is the best place to buy. And in the middle third, traders usually should do very little trading if they trade at all. Markets are either in trends or in trading ranges and they transition one from the other. A trading range eventually has a successful breakout and a trend eventually evolves into a trading range. It's helpful to look at a trend for early signs of conversion into a trading range. Because once it's a trading range, you're going to be trading it differently from how you trade it when it was a trend. Strong rally here. Strong rally here. I always want to know what the bars to the left look like. And that tells me how I'm going to be trading this breakout. The probability of higher prices depends a lot upon the bars to the left. Here we have a breakout. Three consecutive bull bars closing into their highs. Another four consecutive bull bars, two of them good sized bodies. Breaking above a range. This is a strong breakout. Probably it'll either be a bull trend, a pullback and follow through up, or a bull leg and a bigger trading range. In either case, buying up here is a good bet because even if it is a bull leg in a trading range, it'll trade back down here. It'll come back up here because trading ranges trade down and they trade up. So this is a good buy, expecting higher prices or at least a pullback that will come back to this price and you can avoid a loss. When the breakout is far above the bars to the left, it's more likely to be the start of a bull trend. And therefore you can expect higher prices. On the other hand, look at this breakout. It looked even stronger than this one, but look to the left. It's not nearly as strong as the sell off that preceded it and it did not go above this high. Do you think this is a bull leg in a trading range or do you think this is the start of a big bull trend? Is it above all the bars to the left? This was above all the bars to the left and likely to have follow through buying. This we had a big move up, a big move down and therefore big confusion and big confusion usually means a trading range. And now we have another big move up. So big move down, big move up, probably trading range. Therefore, this is probably a bull leg in a trading range. A lot of times trading ranges are filled with two and three legged moves and sometimes the two legged moves are not so obvious. However, we went up here, a bull bar and then a bear bar. It's possible that this is the second leg up in a trading range. First leg here, pull back, second leg here. When you have a strong breakout like this, especially if it's a second leg up, but it's not above all the bars to the recent left, the most recent 10, 20, 30, 40 bars, it's probably going to be a bull leg in what will become a trading range and less likely to be the beginning of a bull trend. If this continues up here, well above this bar and it has a couple strong bull bars like this closing above prior bars, then we can start talking about it as being the start of a bull trend. But as long as it's not breaking above a prior major lower high, it's still more likely to be a bull leg in a trading range. Persistent breakout, it's a spike on a higher timeframe chart. It would simply be two or three bull bars and then a pullback. You can call it a triangle. You can call it a wedge bull flag, three legs down, one and then bull bars and then two pullback and then three spike, pullback and channel. Strong bull trend. And this reversed down deeply. Strong enough up so that it's probably a bull leg in a trading range and not a pullback in a bear trend. Therefore, even if a trader bought here, if they bought more lower, chances are they could get out with a profit on their lower entry and get out break even on the first entry. The point is when the breakout is above the bars to the left, higher chance of being a trend. When it's a strong breakout but not above the bars to the left, higher probability it'll be a bull leg in what will become a trading range and not the start of a bull trend. I mentioned a moment ago confusion as being one of the hallmarks of a trading range. Strong bear breakout. We have five consecutive bear bars, three of them good sized bodies, all five closing below their midpoints. And therefore you have to be thinking that it could be the possible start of a bear trend or it could simply be a bear leg that could end up as a trading range. It's unlikely to immediately reverse up into a bull trend. When it's strongly down like this, the odds are it's either the start of a bear trend or the start of a trading range. And either case, bears will sell the first rally. If it's a trend, the pullback will be small. If the pullback is deep and retraces most of this, then we're probably forming a trading range. Beginners will look at this and they'll only consider one possibility, bear trend. But that's not the only possibility. Realistically, a strong sell off like this is either the start of a bear trend or a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Traders know that nothing is 100%. And even when they see a strong sell off like this, there's probably only a 60% chance it's going to lead to a measured move down in a trend. And there's a 40% chance that it will not, that it will reverse up and most likely become a trading range. It could reverse up into a bull trend. But when it's this strongly down, usually the first reversal up is minor and you get a trading range instead of a bull trend. And now we have a reversal. We have four bull bars all closing above their midpoints, three closing on their highs, undoing much of the bearishness that we have right here. Look to the left. It's still below this high. So this could very well be a bull leg in a trading range. Strong enough reversal up. Probably if we reverse down, bulls will buy it and we'll test back up here again. Big down, big up creates big confusion. Big confusion usually results in a trading range. You have disappointed bears who are disappointed by seeing this and you might get disappointed bulls. Disappointment is one of the hallmarks of a trading range. The other is confusion. And by disappointment, this is an example of disappointment. The bears think they're going to get a bear trend and then they get a big reversal up. Some bulls think it's going to be a bull trend, but if it's a trading range, they'll soon be disappointed. In the markets in a trading range, you never know where the bottom or top is until after there's a pretty strong reversal. At this moment, this is a pretty good candidate for the bottom. And after this strong sell-off, this is a pretty good candidate for the top. But trading ranges constantly break above prior highs, even major highs like this, and they constantly break below lows, even a major low like this, and then reverse. Markets have inertia. Remember my inertia rule. 80% of the time when the market is trying to break out into a trend, it's going to fail and it will reverse, even if the leg down or the leg up is strong. If traders think it's a trading range, and after big down, big up, they are thinking trading range, they'll start to look to sell near the top and scale in higher, betting against a bull trend. And they'll look to buy near the bottom and scale in lower, betting against a bear trend. And they'll take quick profits because buying down here, they're not expecting a bull trend. They're expecting a bull leg in a trading range. And up here, they're going to take quick profits as well, because they're not expecting a bear trend. They're expecting a sell-off that will be a bear leg in the trading range. The bears have a small second leg down here, a better second leg down here. They were expecting a second leg down after such a strong sell-off, but the bulls are expecting a second leg up after such a strong rally. Remember, trading ranges often have two-legged moves. One pull back two, one pull back two. And after such a strong rally, chances are we're going to test back up. This might be the test up, but this is strong enough so that we're probably going to come up to this high close area. Consecutive bear bars, maybe it's a bear trend again. It's not. You see this and you thought it was a bear trend. You were disappointed. You see this, you think it was a bull trend, and now you're disappointed. Now you're seeing bear bars again. Well, we have big down, big up, big confusion. We're probably in a trading range. And therefore, while this might be a measuring gap, this close is below that low, and we might get a measured move down based upon the height of this small trading range. More likely, the gap will close and this will end up as a bear leg in what will become a trading range. Gap between this close and that low, it might lead to a measured move down from this high to that low. But more likely, it's a two-legged move down in our trading range. And skilled traders will look at that and say, oh, we've got a bear bar but a bull bar. We have a bear bar but a bull bar. The follow through after the bear bars is bad. We have a big tail on the bottom of this bull bar. The bear bar here is shrinking compared to that bar. We're in an area where the bulls bought strongly twice, one pullback, two. This is probably more likely a bear leg in the trading range. And the bulls will be looking to buy. They'll buy this close. They'll buy at that low. And they'll certainly buy the reversal up. And they'll be scalping because they're not expecting a bull trend. They're expecting that any rally will not go very far and that the market will continue sideways. Double bottom, high or low. You can call it a bear trend, bull breakout, double bottom, high or low, major trend reversal. But only 40% of major trend reversals actually lead to a major trend reversal into an opposite trend, a bull trend. More likely this rally is a two-legged move up in a trading range. And a lot of times the legs are nested. Two legs up, one pullback, two. Two legs down, one pullback, two. The first leg subdivided into two legs. The second leg subdivided into a wedge. One pullback, two, pullback, three. And this might be simply two legs up in a trading range. This could be a second leg trap. It's very common in a trading range to get a second leg that is especially strong, making traders believe it'll be a measuring gap in the start of a bull trend. And then it simply reverses. And you'll also get second leg traps near the bottom. Trapping beginners into thinking that the trading range is going to break to the downside and that strong second leg reverses back up. Five consecutive bull bars, four of them closing above their midpoints, two closing on their highs, begin to see this as a breakout. Just like the bears thought that this bear bar was going to successfully break out below this low, beginning bulls think that this bar is going to remain a breakout above this high. And this close is going to remain above that high. But look to the left. We're still below the top of the bear leg. And this could be simply a big two-legged move up. One, pullback, and two, where the pullback subdivided and the rally subdivided. It's not clearly bullish yet. It's still more likely a bull leg in our trading range. And therefore bears will look to sell. And bulls will look to sell out of their lungs to take profits. Two legs up, one pullback two. Two legs down, one pullback two. Two legs up, one pullback two. Probable second leg trap. I'll talk about that later. Where you have a very strong second leg trapping traders into thinking the market is turning into a trend, but it traps bulls into buying high. You get second leg traps at the bottom, trapping bears into selling low. And trading ranges disappoint traders. Chances are the bulls will be disappointed and we'll get a reversal. Which we did. A very tight channel lasting eight bars, four with pretty good bear bodies, and seven bars without a bull body. Beginners see that as what they hope is the start of a bear trend. A big low two rally. One pullback two. So the bears are hoping this is a big bear flag after this initial sell-off. And they're hoping to get trend resumption down. Experienced traders know that bear legs accelerate near the bottom and the bear leg looks strongest near the bottom of the range. And the bull legs often look strongest near the top of the range. Yet, trading ranges have inertia. Eighty percent of the breakout attempts will fail. We tried to get a bear breakout. It failed. A bull breakout. A bear breakout. A bear breakout. A bull breakout. A bear breakout. It's better to bet on reversals than bet on successful breakouts. And two small legs down. One. And then a high one. And then a high two. A double bottom bull flag. And a rally. A small pullback bull trend for the rest of the day. But it's still in the trading range. And therefore, bull leg in a trading range. Bear leg in a trading range. Not the start of a bear trend. And bull leg in a trading range. In trading ranges. As I said, traders are constantly disappointed. And sometimes you'll get good looking setups. And they just don't seem to work. And that means that the probability is never quite as high as you want. And bad setups seem to work pretty well. When you think, gosh, they shouldn't work at all. They're low probability bets, but they work much more often than you think. So, there are very few really high probability setups. And very few really low probability setups. The probabilities tend to hover closer to 50% instead of 40% stores. And then you just want more wins. And not immediately, you'll look especially if there is, my ROIад has one solution and ends up, that's them only if I've ever STEAL right has a low trade able. at all. They're low probability bets, but they work much more often than you think. So there are very few really high probability setups and very few really low probability setups. The probabilities tend to hover closer to 50% instead of 40% and 60%. It generates confusion. Five consecutive bear bars and a doji bar, you think, well, that's a bad looking buy. Well, it's a trading range. You don't know that at this moment, but if ever you see bad looking buy signals lead to profitable trades or bad looking sell signals lead to profitable trades, then you're having low probability trades working pretty well. You have to assume that the market's probably in a trading range. The same right there, four consecutive bull bars, yet we had a swing down lasting more than 20 bars. We have a double bottom or slightly higher low, major trend reversal, bear trend, bull breakout, higher low, a high two buy, good looking bull bar. You think it's a high probability trade, but the market went sideways for about 30 bars. A bull body after three bull bars and the market's trying to turn up. You wouldn't think it would lead to much of a sell off, but we had two big bear bars and two legs down, one pull back two. Low probability sell, but it's still got two legs down. Low probability events are not as low probability as you think when the market's in the trading range. And if you see low probability events being profitable up and down, that's a sign that the market is probably in a trading range. You're not going to trade a chart that looks like this. This is two or three hundred bars. You're only going to be trading a screen that has a hundred bars or so. However, I'm putting all these bars here to illustrate a point about support and resistance. Prior highs are resistance, and if the market breaks above a prior high, then that prior high becomes support. We broke out above these highs and it became support. The market reversed up. When the market reverses down here, at the time, you don't know that that is resistance. But after it has reversed down, you assume that it's resistance, and if the market gets up there again, it'll sell off again. So prior highs are always resistance. We tried to rally here, we sold off. You expect that when we get back there, maybe the bears will win again, and the bears will win again. And you expect the bears to win again, but here they didn't win so well, and we went to a new high. However, the bears won above this high. Resistance is a force above the current price, where there might be more sellers than buyers. And support is the opposite. Support is a level below the current price, where there probably are going to be more buyers than sellers. Support keeps the market from falling too far, and it tends to keep the market in a trading range. A prior low, the market reversed up. Broke below this low, reversed up. The market reversed up repeatedly here. When it got down there again, it reversed up. When it got near it again, it reversed up. When the market's in a trading range, the bulls and bears alternate control. The bulls make money during the bull legs, and the bears make money during the bear legs. A range is simply a market that's mostly sideways with repeated reversals. Usually, a trading range has at least one bull leg lasting 10 or 20 bars or more, and one bear leg lasting 10 or 20 bars. The market's usually always in long, and also always in short. You get some kind of big up, big down, big confusion appearance to the chart, and you have to assume the market is probably sideways. Especially when you look at these bars, it keeps reversing every two or three bars. It lacks consecutive big bars. We have consecutive big bars here, but disappointing and terrible follow through. When you look at a chart, and you see a swing up where the market's clearly always in long, you see a swing down where it's clearly always in short, you have to assume the market's in a trading range. Usually, before you can conclude that the market's in a trading range, you need to see two legs up and two legs down. One pull back two, one, one on one, pull back two. So at this point, the market is probably in a trading range. It's still possibly a bull trend. It might be forming a double bottom, and it may rally forever. Here it rallied for 100 bars. So it was in a bull trend, and it was also in a bear trend. It could have sold off forever, and this could have been the start of a bear trend. Whenever the market's in a trading range, it's also always in a bull trend and always in a bear trend. However, only one side ultimately wins. Here the bulls won for about 100 bars. Once you see two legs up and two legs down, it could be in either order. It could be two legs down, and then two legs up. You have to assume that the market is more likely in a trading range than in a bull or bear channel. Two legs up, two legs down. You have to conclude that we're now in a trading range, and we're probably going to go sideways for an indefinite number of bars. 10 or 20 bars, maybe more. Ultimately, the market went sideways for, I don't know, 250 bars or so, the entire screen. I mentioned before that when the market's in the trading range, the legs up and down often have subdivisions into two legs or three legs. You can see this first leg up, one pullback two, subdivided into one pullback two or into a wedge, one, two, three. Two legs down, one pullback two. Two big legs up, one pullback two. This had a subdivision into two legs, this subdivided into three. So this breakout led to a wedge, or you can do it the other way. This could be a wedge, one, two, three, and then this breakout led to two legs up. Two legs up, one pullback two, and it's subdivided into multiple other smaller patterns. Two legs down, one pullback, maybe two. Well, two continued down, and now it became one pullback wedge. So spike and channel be our trend. You sometimes hear me use the term fractal, markets are fractal. And by that, what I mean is that any pattern that you see often subdivides into smaller, similar patterns. A trading range subdivides into lots of smaller trading ranges. This is a trading range, this is a trading range, and this is a trading range. And within them, there are smaller trading ranges as well. Inside trading ranges, you frequently see doji bars, bars that close near their middle and have prominent tails. A single doji bar is a one bar trading range. And if you were to look at a smaller time frame chart, you would see that it's a trading range. For example, this bull doji, the market went down and went up like this, down and up. Big down, big up usually results in a trading range. And therefore, when you see a lot of dojis on the chart, you're probably going to be mostly in a sideways market. Traders are always looking for signs of whether or not the market is in a trend or in a trading range. When I think the market might be in a trading range, I'm looking for evidence that it probably is. Very often, as soon as the day begins or the session begins, you can tell from the first bar that a trading range is likely. If you start seeing early signs of a trading range, traders will begin to trade it like a trading range rather than like a trend. Here's the start of a day. Big up, big down, big confusion, big up again, probably going to be a trading range. Here we have a breakout of a channel with lots of reversals. Instead of consecutive bear bars, we have a bear bar and a bull bar and prominent tails. A couple of bear bars, a good bull bar increases the chances that today is going to have a lot of trading range price action. A trading range Everybody knows that a trading range will eventually evolve into a trend, that there'll be a breakout. However, they also know that while it's in a trading range and until it clearly has broken out into a trend, traders can make much more money trading it like a trading range betting against successful breakouts. Knowing that eventually they'll probably lose. Eventually one of their times when they sell at the top or buy at the bottom, there'll be a successful breakout into a trend. So if they buy at the bottom, it'll end up breaking into a bear trend eventually. Or if they sell at the top, eventually it'll break out into a bull trend. But they'll make enough money on all the prior trades to offset the final loss, if they even get the final loss. A lot of traders won't take that last trade because there'll be signs that the market might be evolving into a trend. A lot of traders will be looking at the market. I'm always looking at the bars. What is the evidence that the market might be in a trend? Well, we have consecutive bear bars, but they're not particularly big. And if you look to the left, we see multiple reversals. The bodies seem a little bit too small to change the price action that we're seeing. Also, the tails are a little bit prominent. Tail on top of this bar, tail below that bar. And here we're getting a bull reversal, but prominent tails and the bodies are not all that big. Therefore, this is more likely a bull leg in a trading range than the start of a strong bull trend. More bars with prominent tails. We're trying to get a bull breakout, but several of these bars have tails on top. Here we're getting a bull breakout and follow through, tail on top, and we're not clearly far above the bars to the left. And the same here. We're selling off, but we're getting tails on the bottom of the bars. And therefore, the sell-off is probably not all that strong. A lot of the bars have small bodies. If they're small enough, you can call them a doji, or you can simply call them small trend bars. Instead of consecutive big bars closing on their highs and the legs up, or consecutive big bars closing on their lows on the way down, we got a lot of bars with small bodies and prominent tails. Evidence that the market's more likely in a trading range. Lots of tight trading ranges. Lots of overlap, many reversals in a very small range. That is further evidence of a tight trading range. I talked about how trading ranges can be broad or tight, and when they're broad, traders can buy low, sell high, and scalp, and they can enter with stops or limit orders. When they're tight, most traders should not trade, but experienced traders will trade them with limit orders. I'm also always looking for early signs that the market might be in a trading range. Are there a lot of bars with prominent tails, small bodies? Is there an absence of consecutive strong trend bars up or down? Are there a lot of reversals? Are there a lot of two-legged moves up and down? All of that is evidence that the market is probably in a trading range, and if it is, I'm going to start trading it as if it's in a trading range. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of four videos on trading within trading ranges. Please moderate. Your Custis Academy