 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability. Traders often hear about risk-reward ratios. Two variables when you take a trade, risk and reward. There's an equally important variable that you never hear about, and that's probability. You have to consider all three variables whenever you're taking a trade. Probability, risk, and reward. If you want, you can think of them as simply two variables, probability and then the risk-reward ratio. If a trader sees this breakout with this big tail, and then a second attempt to go up, and another reversal down here, he might sell below the low of this bar and put a stop either above the high of this bar or up here. The result was a big bear trend. Whether he had to stop here or here, the reward was small compared to the risk. He ended up taking a trade that had a very good risk-reward ratio. However, selling right here, the probability that you're going to get a swing down is small. More likely, you're going to go sideways. Low probability, very big risk-reward ratio. If a trader prefers higher probability, he'll wait for the bear breakout and a follow-through bar. This bar closing below the low of the past 30 bars. The probability is high that the market's going to fall for at least a measured move from the open of this bear breakout to the close of the bear breakout, which is down here. 60% chance or more that we're falling down here. Yet, if you sell here, you're getting a high probability trade, but your stop is still here or here. So the risk is much greater than for a trader who sold here. This trader had great risk-reward and lower probability. This trader has worse risk. His stop is further away, but a higher probability of making money. You could also sell below this double top bear flag. A low one, low two, double top this high and this high. That is also a high probability trade for making money. But again, the stop is up here and that's the trade off. You either get a high probability of making money. It's always accompanied with bad risk-reward. Or you have a trade with excellent risk-reward. That's always accompanied by bad probability. For every trade, there's always one institution buying and another institution selling. And there has to be a reason for both of them to take the trade. In general, it's a trade-off. One trader gets better probability and worse risk-reward. The other institution gets worse probability but better risk-reward. Both are acceptable if you manage the trade correctly. Should you buy or sell? You choose the variable that's more important to you. Some traders always try to take high probability trades because they like to win a lot. However, that always means smaller risk-reward. In general, the risk is greater, the reward is less. Other traders really focus on big reward. They like to get very big winners. However, when they do that, it's always accompanied by lower probability. When traders start out, they work really hard to save enough money to trade. The one variable that they consider far beyond any other is risk. They don't want to lose money. They're afraid that if they lose money, they'll lose their account and they'll lose their dream. It'll be the death of their dream. So it's the equivalent of dying. And when traders begin trading, they tend to focus only on risk. And they often totally ignore probability, which is unfortunate because you need to pay attention to all three variables if you're going to trade profitably. Beginners are always looking for the lowest risk trades and they lose money. And it's because they don't understand that a low risk trade means low probability. That means you're going to lose most of the time. And then if you add to it poor management because of inexperience, your losses are going to be bigger and you're going to lose even a higher percentage of the time. It doesn't matter whether you take a trade with a great risk reward and lower probability or a trade with a higher probability and worse risk reward if you manage the trade properly. Both are reasonable ways to trade. Both have positive traders equations. Some traders don't worry too much about picking exact tops and bottoms. A lot of them will wait for a pullback or breakout because then the probability of making money is higher. They'll sell the breakout or they'll sell the bear flag, the pullback from that breakout. These traders are comfortable having a stop far away either here or here because they know the probability is high that they'll make money. That bigger risk is the price they pay to get the high probability of a profit. Experienced traders will sometimes take lower risk, lower probability trades. Other times they'll take higher probability, bigger risk trades, whichever one they feel like gives them the better edge. For example, if a trader has to leave soon and they cannot stay to watch the trade all day, they need a high probability trade. They need a quick profit, a small profit. A small profit means a small reward. It's a scalp. That means if they're going to take the trade, they're expecting to win a high percentage of the time. The best way to improve a risk reward ratio is the swing trade. Go for a very big reward. For example, sell and you stay short until the market either reverses or until the end of the session. Let's say a trader sells below this low and uses a very tight stop just above the high of that bar. So they get short right here below that bar. If he's a scalper, he might get out with one times his initial risk. His initial risk is above the high of the sell signal bar. He entered here and this is one times his risk. A swing trader, on the other hand, will stay with the trade until the trade is no longer valid. Here, three pushes down. One, two, three. A parabolic wedge. We have a bull bar closing on its high. Maybe we'll get a minor reversal. This is a reasonable place to exit. We'll look at the size of the reward. Entering here and exiting here. Risking to here or here. So excellent risk reward ratio. But low probability. 40% chance he's going to get the swing down. 60% chance he's not going to get the swing down. Either the market will go up and hit a stop or it'll simply go sideways. The huge reward relative to risk more than offsets the low probability of a very big profit. It's reasonable to sell there. There's another way to improve the traders equation and that's by scaling in. Adding to a position, even if it's a losing position. Beginners should not do that. Scaling into a trade increases the probability of making money. But you pay for that with a worse risk reward ratio. You're increasing your risk and you're usually reducing your reward as well. For example, we have a bear trend, but we have three pushes down. One, two, three. It's a parabolic wedge. Consecutive cell climaxes. And there's a bull bar. Consecutive bull bars. This is not a high probability cell. However, the reversal up is probably only going to be minor and will probably test back down. When you have a very tight bear channel, the first reversal up is minor and you're usually going to test back down. The bears sell here hoping it'll continue down, but confident that the first reversal up will not go far. They can sell more and then get out around their original entry price. Break even on their first short and then with a profit on their second short. Sell more maybe below here. A low two or a low three. Low one, low two. Maybe this is a low two and this is a low three. It's still below the top of the sell climax. It's still below the top of the bear leg. Chances are the market's going to test down to this area. Maybe a stop at the top of that most recent bear leg. He gets out when the market comes down to his original entry price. At the low of that bar. He sold just a little bit below that bar. He might get out at the low of that bar and take a tiny loss or he'll get out just below the low of that bar and get out break even on this first entry. And he gets out with a profit on the second entry. He increased the probability of making money by adding to his position, but he's also increasing his risk. Instead of risking from here to here, he's additionally now risking from here to there as well. So he increased his risk to get the higher probability of making money. Again, only experienced traders should do this kind of a thing. We have a bear trend, a bull breakout, and a higher low. And now we have a double bottom. If you want, you can call it a double bottom, higher low, major trend reversal. You can call it a double bottom bull flag. So bull breakout, a pullback, and then now a double bottom and possibly a bull trend. In any case, we have a bull buy signal bar. Traders will buy above that buy signal bar. And some of them will put a stop just below the double bottom. Very small risk. And that immediately tells you the probability is low. If you take this buy, you're probably going to lose money. It's probably going to fall below the low of that bar. Whenever the risk is small, chances are you're going to lose. Stop just below the double bottom. You're buying in the middle of a tight trading range. Most attempts to break out of a tight trading range fail. Attempts to the downside or attempts to the upside. A trader, on the other hand, might prefer a high probability trade. And here we have a very big bull breakout bar and a second consecutive big bull breakout bar. There's a 60% chance after a strong breakout like this that the market's going to rally for at least a measured move up based upon the open of the breakout to the close of the last bar of the breakout. 60% chance we're going up here. High probability. But the stop is still down here. This trader put his stop here. The trader who bought that close, his stop is here as well. He has a much higher probability of making money, but he also has a much greater risk than the trader who took the initial buy. A triangle, three pushes down, one, two, three, four, and a bull bar. It's still a high probability that the traders will make money if they take the buy above that bull bar. The probability here is not as high as the probability here. Slightly lower probability, but still close to 60% that you'll make a profit buying above that bull bar. Buying the breakout, very high probability. Buying the pullback, slightly higher probability. Buying the pullback here, slightly lower probability. Buying here, buying here. Again, lower probability the higher up you go. We have a bull trend and a bear breakout and a tight trading range. In the tight trading range, we have a double top lower high and a bear bar closing on its low. This is a reasonable short. You sell below that bear bar for a double top lower high major trend reversal. Stop above that high. Very small risk. And that tells you immediately you're probably going to lose money. 60% of the time you're going to lose money. 40% of the time you're going to get a swing. But the swing is so big that it more than offsets the loss. It's reasonable to take that low probability short. Other traders prefer high probability trades. They'll wait for the bear breakout. We have consecutive big bear bars closing below the low of the past 50 bars. High probability that we're going to fall for at least a measured move down. From the open of the bear breakout to the close of this bar, we're going to fall for a measured move down 60% of the time. We're getting a pullback, so increased uncertainty, but it's still a fairly high probability short, either below this bar or that bar. Again, whether you take the short here or here, the stop is still here. So the risk is greater for these high probability shorts compared to this short, but the probability of making money is greater as well. I've met many traders over the years who win 90% of the time. Without asking them, I automatically know that they are scalping. If you're winning 90% of the time, you have to have a bad risk reward ratio, and that usually means a very small profit. In other words, you're scalping. You cannot get a great variable, 90% probability, without giving something up, usually risk reward. And that means you're always giving up risk reward. Usually it means you're taking a small risk and a small profit. I have a high probability of winning. You have a good risk reward. That means you lose a little and I make a little, but I have a high probability of success. These are all examples of scalps. You buy here, you scalp out. You've got a small bull flag, you buy above the bull bar. You bet against the reversal down, you buy that low, you buy the reversal up. These are all high probability trades if you're taking small profits. Therefore, they're all scalps. Selling here, three pushes up. One, two, three, small wedge, bear bar. Probably going to turn into a trading range. High probability, small risk. And then these are all scalps. Sell the close, sell the close, sell the low one, sell the low two, sell the breakout. Sell the double top bear flag. Sell the breakout below here. Sell the close. Sell the low one short. All the way down. Lots of scalps. High probability of success if you're taking a small reward. In other words, if you're scalping. Whenever you take any trade, you automatically know the risk and reward. For example, if you're buying, you should automatically, as soon as you enter, put in both a stop to sell if the market goes against you, and another order to take profits at a reasonable target. That distance to the profit-taking order is your reward. And the distance to your stop is the risk. You always know the risk and reward with every trade. However, you don't always know probability. In fact, you never know probability. The risk is the number of ticks or pips to your protective stop. The reward is the number of ticks or pips to your profit-taking limited order. The probability is very, very important, but it's never clear, and most traders ignore it, which is too bad, because you need to pay attention to it if you want to structure profitable trades. In reversal down a pair of strong bear bars closing on their lows, you sell the close, a high probability short. Your stop is either above this sell climax or above the top of the bear leg, so you know how much you're risking. With a high probability trade, you know the probability is you'll make at least a reward equal to your risk. You sell that close, stop here or here, and measure move down is here, and the reward is here. A reasonable place to take at least partial profits. A high probability trade, the reward is only equal to risk, so your risk-reward ratio is 1. That's a low risk-reward ratio, but it's mathematically okay because the probability of making money is high. A strong bull breakout, I always look to the left. I want to make sure that the market is above prior highs, that it might be a bull trend. And if I get a strong reversal down, I look to the left as well. Big buy climax, it could fall below that low and still be in a bull trend. If it falls below the bottom of the bull trend, then it's no longer in a bull trend. It's then either in a trading range or a bear trend. Whenever you have a strong breakout like this, high probability that you're making money. But you do not yet know if it's a bull lag in a trading range or a bull lag in a bull trend. Not great follow through might get a deep pullback, but as long as the pullback stays above the bottom of the bull trend, it's still possibly a bull trend. With this big of a reversal, big up, big down, it generates big confusion. Probably the market's now in a trading range. However, as long as it stays above this low, it's not in a bear trend. It's either in a trading range or a bull trend. Strong reversal down and strong follow through. At this instant, the market's always in short. However, it's still above this low. It could simply be a deep pullback in a bull trend or a bear leg in a trading range. Some bears will sell that close. In general, I do not because it's still around the low of the biclimax and it's still above this low. So that is not a high probability sell, even though you have consecutive bear bars. Look to the left. We're still possibly in a trading range or possibly in a broad bull channel with higher lows and maybe even higher highs. It's always in short, but unless you get strongly below the bottom of this biclimax, it might be simply a bear trap, trapping traders into selling low in a bull channel or trading range. You cannot tell on this chart, but this low actually fell a tiny bit below the bottom of this biclimax. And that's common. If you have a biclimax and a reversal down, usually the market tries to fall at least a little bit below the bottom of the biclimax. And then it decides whether to form a double bottom with that biclimax and resume up or break below it and fall for a measured move based upon the height of that biclimax. For the bulls, it's still a bull trend and it's a double bottom with a biclimax low. It's also a higher low. It's above this low and it's above that low. Yet, whenever I see a reversal down this far in a bull trend, chances are it's not going to be a strong bull trend. More likely, it's going to be big up, big down, big confusion. Confusion and confusion usually means trading range. Bulls will buy the reversal up. You buy low, sell high and you take quick profits. It's reasonable to buy this low. It's a double bottom with that low and it's still above the bottom of the bull trend. So it's still a higher low and a possible bull channel. More likely, you're buying low in what will become a trading range. Bull trend and a pullback. As long as the pullback stays above a 50% retracement of the biclimax, the probability favors higher prices. But the risk is greater because your stop is down here or down here. If the market falls below the midpoint, the probability for the bulls is less. But so is the risk because you're closer to the stop. So buying down here, you have less probability of a bull trend, but you also have less risk. Buying up here, the probability is good, better than 50-50 that you'll make money. But the risk is far away and the reward might not be all that great as well. We have a weak rally. We're probably not going to go much higher. Buying up here, stop down here, down here. Not much reward. Bad risk reward ratio, but high probability. So traders buying up here, good probability, but bad risk reward. Once it dips a little bit below the midpoint, probability drops to about 50% that the market is still in a bull trend. But the risk is less. So if you buy here, you're closer to the stop here or here. You're getting better risk reward, but lower probability. If you're buying in the bottom third, the probability is less that the market's still in a bull trend. Maybe it's only a 40% chance that we're going up to a new high. But the risk is less as well because the stop is here. Whether you buy up here, here or here, the stop is still here. As the market falls, you're getting closer to the stop. If you're entering down here, if you're buying down here, you have less risk. But after this much of a reversal down, retracing all of the bull trend, you have less probability of the market making a new high. This is the most important price for the bears. It's the bottom of the bull trend. The bears want to get below this low. Because if it gets below this low, the market's no longer in a bull trend. It's then either in a trading range or a bear trend. As long as it stays above this low, it's either in a bull trend or a trading range. When you're getting a sell-off like this down to the bottom of the buy climax, you just don't know if it's simply a test of the bottom of the buy climax. As I said, when you get a reversal down after a buy climax, the market usually gets at least a little bit below the bottom of the buy climax. And then you don't know if there are a lot of dollars buying down here looking for a trend resumption up. Is the market going to form a higher low and be in a broad bull channel? Or is this an actual reversal that will break below the bottom of the bull trend and become a bear trend? Strong reversal up, five consecutive bull bars, eight bars without a bear body. We're back to always in the long. That makes a bear trend unlikely. Now we're probably either in a bull trend or a trading range. Any time I see a strong breakout, I always look to the left. Is the breakout above all of the bars or just above some of the bars? If it's still below this high, this rally could simply be a second leg up in a broad bear channel. First leg pull back, second leg. Or a second leg up in a trading range. Even though the market is always in the long, maybe by the close of this bar, that does not mean bull trend. It could simply be a bull leg in a bear channel or a bull leg in a trading range. Breakout, follow through. You can call it a head and shoulders bottom. Left shoulder, head, right shoulder. Bear trend, high or low, major trend reversal. A breakout and follow through above the neckline. We're always in the long. We might go up for a measured move. It might, in fact, be the start of a bull trend. But unless it gets above the top of the most recent lower high, it's still in a bear trend. And this could be simply a bull leg within a broad bear channel or a bull leg in a trading range. Traders will buy the close, confident that the probability is high that we're going at least enough up to make a profit. However, unless we get above this high, this rally is simply a double top lower high. Or you can call it simply a lower high and possibly a broad bear channel. And traders will look to sell the reversal down. Two legs up, one pull back two. This could be a second leg trap. Trapping traders into thinking it's a bull trend. But if you look to the left, we have not gone above the most recent major lower high. And therefore, this could simply be a trap. Tricking traders into buying too high in either a bear channel or in a trading range. You can sell the reversal down there or higher probability sell this reversal down here. Double top bear flag. Double top bear. Strong bull swing. Strong bull swing. But still possibly a pullback from this strong leg down. Unless we get above that high, a major lower high. No matter how strong this rally is, it still could be simply a pullback from this sell-off. Here's a 50% pullback. As long as the market stays below the 50% pullback, then the probability is at least 50% chance that we're going lower. Below the 50% pullback, the probability favors the bears. The bears selling here have greater risk. They have higher probability. That's always accompanied with greater risk. The bulls need to break above this lower high. Otherwise, we could still be in a bear trend. Again, if it gets above the lower high, it's no longer a bear trend because the bear trend needs lower highs. Down here, the risk is great for the bears. Their stop is way up here. And the probability is high. If you're selling down here, the reward might simply be a measured move down based upon the height of this trading range. We have a double top bear flag. And the risk is greater than that. The distance to this high, if you're selling down here, is greater than a measured move down. So the reward is less than the risk. So it's a bad risk reward ratio, but a high probability of making money for the bears if they're selling down here and stop up here. If you start selling above the 50% pullback, the risk is getting less because the stop is getting closer and the probability is getting less as well. The probability for the bears. If you're selling in the top third of the bear leg, there's a greater chance that we're going to break above the protective stop. A greater chance that this is a trading range instead of a bear trend. A 60% chance of the bulls getting above that high and only a 40% chance of the bears getting to a new low. But the risk for the bears is less because they're very close to the stop and the reward is greater. It's very far away. Bears selling up here have a much better risk reward ratio, but a much smaller probability of making money. Down here, bears have worse risk reward, but higher probability. In the bottom half of the bear trend, the probability favors the bears. 60% chance we're going to a new low. And the probability gets less the higher up the market goes and the risk reward ratio gets better for the bears. The risk is less and the reward is greater. In the top third, the risk reward clearly favors the bears. The chance of a new low is less, but the reward is very big relative to the risk. When you have a strong rally like this, but it's below the top of the bear trend, you don't know how many dollars waiting to sell. How many dollars view this as simply a bi-vacuum test of resistance? Is this simply a second leg trap? Leg one, pull back leg two, with a lot of bears looking to sell in the upper third. You don't know until you see the reversal down. The probability favors the bulls, but the risk reward is better for the bears. There are always bears willing to sell. Once you see the reversal down, the probability is getting better for the bears. But if you sell down here, the risk is greater. In this video, I talked about risk, reward, and probability, and I tried to emphasize the importance of probability. A trader cannot simply think about a risk reward ratio. A great risk reward ratio is meaningless if the probability of making money is very small. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of five videos on the Trader's Equation and Probability.allo Southman Sports Revapeation and Probability eggs minimum deux.