 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on measured moves. In this video, I'm going to be talking about a Leg 1 equals Leg 2 measured move, where the market makes a move, has a pause or a pullback, and then has a second move that is about the same size. First of all, I'm going to be talking about a measured move based upon the height of a prior leg in a trend. So a Leg 1 equals Leg 2 measured move. I will later talk about measured moves based upon a trading range and based upon a prior breakout. So here we have a bull trend, and here is the first leg up. Some computers will say it ended here. Others will say it ended here. And then we had a pullback. One, two, three, and then a second leg. And then you can see the second leg up clearly started here, and it ended there. And this is a perfect Leg 1, Leg 2 measured move. First leg, pullback, second leg. Whenever there's a breakout and it's fairly strong, traders will look for a second leg up. And their first thought is that the second leg will be about the same size as the first leg. Here we have a bull trend, bull trend, pullback, and then a breakout of a wedge bull flag. One, two, three. So clearly a break above the bear trend line. And it has a lot of bull bars, no bear bars. So probably if there's a pullback, there's going to be a second leg up. So traders buying the reversal up are looking to take profits around the same distance up as the first leg traveled. So a Leg 1 equals Leg 2 measured move. Here we have a strong reversal up. So traders are thinking that the market will probably have a second leg up. Maybe the second leg began here. Well, maybe not. Tested back down here. Same price level, but maybe this is the start of the second leg. So here we have a nested Leg 1, Leg 2 measured move. Leg 1, pullback, Leg 2. And the second leg subdivided into a smaller Leg 1, pullback, Leg 2. In fact, this second leg subdivided as well. Leg 1, pullback, Leg 2. Leg 2, pullback, Leg 2, and Leg 2. In general, when a trend is strong, like during a strong breakout, traders expect that after a pullback, the trend will try to resume. And their first goal is to look for a second leg up that is about as big as the first leg. So here we have a strong bull breakout of a bear channel and a pullback. Traders will buy the pullback looking for a second leg up. Also, the first leg up can be the start of a bull trend, but it could also be simply a leg in a trading range. And at this point, we're still below this high with a lot of trading range price action. So this could be the first leg up in a two-legged move within a trading range. In general, the Leg 1, Leg 2 measured move target is the minimum goal after a deep pullback like this. And the market could continue up much further. This is the height of the first leg, pullback. The height of the second leg did not quite reach a Leg 1, Leg 2 target. Bulls hoping to get out there, when they saw this, they changed their minds and they get out here or here. And here, the final bulls gave up. Very often, a Leg 1, Leg 2 measured move takes the form of a spike in channel bull trend. So very strong bull breakout, spike, pullback, channel, wedge channel, 1, 2, 3, or 1, 2, 3. Spike in channel bull trend, channel, weaker trend than the bull breakout. And you expect it to evolve into a trading range. And if you look at this, this looks more like a bull leg in what will become a trading range. Bull bar, bad follow through. Bull bar, bad follow through. Bull bar, bad. Right? So typically, when you have a channel with bad follow through, the rally is probably a leg within a trading range rather than the start of a big bull trend. Bull channel, bear flag. You expect a bear breakout 75% of the time and an evolution into a trading range. I'm also, as a trader, always looking for as many signs that the market is topping out or that a move is ending and that I should be taking profits or even looking for a trade in the opposite direction. So, I'm going to look at the bull bars. Leg one, pullback leg two, obvious. But whenever I see a strong breakout like this early in a trend. So here's a bear trend, early in the bull trend. A pair of very big bull bars. I like to look at the open of the first bar and the close of the final bar of the breakout. Sometimes the breakout is just one bar. Sometimes it's three or four bars. And then I project up from the open of the first bar to the close of the second bar. And that also is an area where bulls will take profits. Here, we sold off. We tried to form a double top. So this is the neckline of the double top. Double top, neckline. If the market goes above the double top, it often travels for a measured move up. Just like if it breaks below the neckline, traders will look for a measured move down. I mentioned that small patterns can be nested within bigger patterns. When the market reaches targets, resistance areas, bulls take profits and aggressive bears begin to look for scalps. When the market is around a measured move target, bulls take profits and bears begin to scalp. Leg one, pull back leg two. Bulls start buying for scalps. Bears take profits. Leg one, pull back leg two. Bulls take profits, or at least partial profits, and bears start to sell for scalps. Small leg one, pull back leg two. Leg one, pull back leg two. Leg one, pull back leg two. And all the way up, leg one, pull back leg two. And then I said nested patterns. Smaller patterns within bigger ones. Leg one, pull back leg two. Leg one, pull back leg two. Leg one, pull back leg two. And then I said nested patterns. Smaller patterns within bigger ones. Leg one, pull back leg two. Leg one, pull back leg two. Leg one, pull back leg two. When the market's in a pretty strong bull trend, the first resistance level usually will not stop the trend. So a strong rally. Trading range. Bulls starting to get trend resumption, probably for a measured move up. At a minimum, based upon the height of the trading range. The range went on for about 30 or 40 bars. Tight trading range. Breakout mode for trend resumption up or trend reversal down. And the first target after a trading range like this that lasts 20, 30, 40 bars is a measured move simply based upon the height of the range. Here, the breakout of the trading range was strong. We had maybe an eight bar bull micro channel with no bear bars, maybe a small bear bar. Probably we'll get more up. In other words, at least one more leg up. Also, we went above the measured move target by quite a bit. So the market is ignoring that resistance level. And that means it'll probably try to reach another resistance level. Strong bull breakout by the close, maybe starting here. So traders will start buying for any reason. They'll buy bull closes, doji closes, low bars, above bars, expecting that the first pullback, the first reverse. The first reversal attempt will be bought and we'll still get higher prices. So you can buy for any reason. When you have a target like this, a measured move up in the market goes through it quite a ways through it without hesitation. It's a sign that the computers are not paying attention to that measured move target. And therefore, traders will look for another target higher up. Maybe leg one, leg two. So leg one and then pull back. Maybe leg two started here. Some computers, it'll say started here. To me, it looks like the leg started here or here. So this would be another area where bulls will take profits and bears will start to look for scalps. Strong breakout. First reversal down probably will fail. Expect at least one more leg up. Bulls buy the breakout above a pullback bar, betting on trend resumption up. Another fairly strong breakout. So the first reversal down probably will fail despite a wedge. One, two, three or one, one, two, three. The bulls are likely to get at least a little bit more up, possibly just one bar. My general rule, my 80% rule, is that when you're in a strong bull trend, 80% of reversal attempts will fail. All of these reversal attempts, double top or higher high major trend reversal, all going to fail. Fail breakout above a tight trading range, probably going to fail. And the reversal attempt becomes a bull flag for trend resumption up. Small double bottom, so a small high two. Bulls will buy above the high of that bar or above the high of the bull bar. A high two bull flag. Possible leg one, pullback leg two. That would be a decent profit taking area for a scalp. It also corresponds to the leg one, leg two measured move. With approximately a measured move based upon the height of this range. We have a breakout. And we've already gone above a measured move up based upon the height of this training range. It's a breakout, possible measuring gap. So I look down to the next support level down here, the start of the rally. Maybe the measured move will be based upon this low to the top of this leg there. And you can see that we have a confluence of resistance here. Leg one, pullback leg two. Measured move up based upon the height of this first leg up. And you can see we're starting to go sideways. So bulls are taking profits and bears are starting to sell. And we're getting a trading range. Even though I said 80% of resistance fails to stop a bull trend, all bull trends end at resistance. So it's important to keep looking at higher resistance levels and then watching what the market does when it gets there. If there's a confluence of resistance at the same price level, bulls will be more willing to take profits. And bears will be more willing to begin to scale in looking for scalps. Bull breakout, nobody's going to sell. Breakout, breakout, nobody's going to begin to sell. But now we're starting to get some sideways price action. So bears will start to sell. End of the session. Take profits. The breakouts are getting smaller. We're starting to get sideways Doji bars. Three pushes up. One, two, three. Confluence of resistance. Leg one, pullback leg two. And then a breakout. And then a measure move up. And as I said, wedge. Three pushes up. Another reason to expect that prices will not go up much for at least several bars, five or ten bars. Wedge top, two resistance levels. Probably at least a couple legs sideways to down. Sometimes when you have a measured move, it's hard to know where the start of the leg up began. There are often many choices. The bull trend began here, the lowest price. Or did it begin here after a trading range? Or did it begin here? And this is just an outlier. Bull trend, pullback, and then start of leg one up. Some computers will say that's the start of the bull trend. And this is a pullback to a slightly lower low. Others will say the lowest price on the chart is the start of the bull trend. Others will say it was a trading range and we started the breakout here. So this is the start of the bull trend. Most computers initially begin with the start of the bull breakout here. Some will say the bull breakout began there. And traders will look at measured move targets based upon both. So here we have a bull reversal and a pullback from the bull breakout. And it went to a lower low. But because we trended up or started to trend up, a lot of computers will say, yeah, the bull trend really began here. Even though this fell below that, this is still simply a pullback from that initial bull reversal. Consecutive bull bars, the second one being big, closing on its high. So traders will look at a measured move up. And you can see that we went sideways here. So the bull trend stopped. A lot of computers did in fact use that first leg up for a measured move and profit taking. It doesn't really matter which one you use. There are computers that use this for the start of the leg one, this, this. You know, I usually start with the nearest one. And if the measured move goes beyond it, then I look at the other ones. Well, this is like, let's say the computer says the bull trend really began here and that this was all a trading range. So leg one, leg two, did it begin here? Did it begin here? Did it begin here? Again, different computers will use different things. Here we started a breakout. I personally would tend to look at this as the start of the second leg up. You can see the profit taking at a measured move. Leg one, pull back leg two. Telling you that a lot of computers said the bull trend began here, not here. And the second leg up began with this bull breakout, not with that low or with that low. Bull breakout follow through. Maybe this is the start of the bull trend for leg two. Other computers will say that. Other computers will say that. And I look at all the possibilities and I watch how the market reacts. And here we got very close to the measured move and we pulled back. That tells me that a lot of computers said that the second leg up began here. We went a little bit above this measured move. These two possibilities for the start of the second leg are almost the same level. And the projection up is around the same price. Doesn't matter which you use. I would look at both and just watch the behavior and the market found profit taking in that general area. If the bull trend continued above bar nine, bulls would then look for other ways to create resistance. So instead of using seven or eight for the start of the second leg, maybe six is the start of the second leg. For the start of the first leg, instead of here, maybe it's here. When the market ignores one target, traders then look for other possible targets. So here we got a pullback. Maybe this is the end of the move. Maybe the labeling is correct. But if we continue up, traders will look at the next resistance level. So they'll look for a lower start to leg two and a lower start to leg one, creating a higher target. Where bulls will take profits and bears will begin to short. This is a bear trend and it's the same situation. Is this the start of leg one here or does it start with the breakout? I look at both and I see what the market does. The leg usually begins with a breakout to the downside. Here's a strong breakout. Here's a reversal. This could be the start of it. Nobody knows. This creates a target that is not as far down. So I'll first look at a target based upon this as leg one. And if it falls below that target, then I'll look at this as the start of leg one. And look at that. We fell below the measured move projection and reversed up. It looks like most computers use the start of the breakout as the start of leg one down. And they saw this as just a training range and not the start of the first leg down. If it fell below this point, then bears would start looking for other ways to draw the projection. And instead of using this for the start of leg one, they would then look at this and that would give a target lower down. A lot of times the end of the measured move is not clear until after there's a strong reversal up. So is this the end of leg one, pull back leg two? Leg one, pull back leg two? Or is it the end of a large leg one or a smaller leg one? Is this leg one, pull back leg two? And we're going lower. This becomes a bear flag and we go lower. Is this the end of leg one? And a very big nested leg one, leg two? So leg one and then pull back and then leg two taking us much lower. Or is this as far as we go? Sometimes you don't know until after you see this kind of big reversal. So you can see the bear trend did not match, did not reach the other possible targets. And therefore the market is not really looking at the chart as leg one, pull back leg two. Or leg one, pull back leg two. Big rally. Now the market is in a trading range. You can argue it's still a bear trend and if this is a double top, neckline, we break below for a measured move down. So you can argue that we're still in a broad bear channel. But at a minimum, we're in a trading range now. That's a strong enough reversal up. So traders will stop looking for leg one, leg two, measured moves down. If anything, they'll be looking for leg one, pull back, leg two, measured move up. So we got leg one, pull back, and leg two failed. A lot of times it fails. So we have a head and shoulders bottom, left shoulder, head, right shoulder. And instead of a bull breakout, we went sideways to down. Most major trend reversals, most head and shoulders, tops and bottoms, result in a swing trade only 40% of the time. 60% of the time, either the trend continues or the market goes mostly sideways. But take a look at this. We have a sell off, maybe leg one, maybe leg one, and we went sideways. So did leg one end here or did it end here? Some computers will say this is simply part of the pull back from the first leg down. And therefore, leg one ended here. And leg two started here or here. Triangle. A lot of head and shoulders bottoms form triangles. So one push, two push, attempted break above the neckline, failed, and it formed a triangle and a bear flag. Instead of a successful head and shoulders bottom. So again, is this the end of leg one? Or is this the end of leg one? Is this the start of leg two? Strong bear breakout. Failed head and shoulders bottom. Did leg two start here? Did it start here? Did it even start here? I doubt that it started here. We sold off. We resumed up. So it looks like we're resetting the count here. I'll first look at this as leg one instead of this. And because it gives me a closer target. And then I have to decide where leg two began. Leg two here did not reach far enough down. Maybe this is just all a pullback from leg one. And then I'm looking for a trend resumption down for leg two. Maybe it started here. Maybe it started here. This could have been a leg one pullback leg two. But in hindsight, it was not. It was just a bare leg in a triangle instead of the end of leg two. However, if it did fall to very close to a measured move target and reversed up, in hindsight, we would say it was leg two. But based upon what we're seeing here, it was not. We did not get close to a leg one, leg two measured move target. And we continued sideways. Strongly down, strongly up, strongly down and up. It looks like if this is going to get a leg one, leg two target, this is not leg two. So this is leg one, or maybe this is leg one. And then we're looking for the short of leg two. And this is the target if this is the end of the first leg. If it falls below this target, then traders will say, well, maybe this is the end of the first leg. And they'll look at the next support level. We've got a strong reversal up here. This is probably what the computer saw. Leg one, trading range, triangle. And then leg two, starting here or here. Different computers use different points. The computers have different algorithms. Nothing is clear except in hindsight. But I always look at the nearest support and resistance levels first. If the market ignores them and goes through them, I then look at the next possibilities. Leg one, pull back leg two. Did not quite get there. It's still probably leg one, pull back leg two. But it's possible that it's leg one, pull back leg two. Since this became a trading range, it makes me wonder if this is not leg two. So this is leg one, trading range. And maybe leg two starts here at the start of this breakout. At some point in here, I'm beginning to wonder if this is the start of the second leg up. That we had a rally and this whole thing is a trading range after the rally. And that this is simply a strong bull trend in the pull back from the initial breakout. Does not matter that it went far above the top of the bull breakout. Effectively, it's still possibly a bull leg and a pull back from a strong bull breakout. Eight bar rally, so possible trend resumption and possibly the start of a second leg up. So leg one and then trading range and then leg two. You can see some computers did in fact say the leg one ended here. Because you can see at the leg one leg two target, there was some selling. Bulls taking profits and bear shorting. For leg two, did it end here? Did it end here? Did it end here? Different computers see different things. Does not matter. I'm just looking for reasons to take profits and reasons to scalp in the other direction. In this video, I talked about leg one equals leg two measured moves. And in that kind of a measured move, the market has a move, a swing or a trend. And then a pull back or a pause. And then a second move that is about the same size as the first move. The market often finds profit takers at that measured move target. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on measured moves. actual things to start with. This is a new dot. The market was added five more times to hard to lenditelize them, tinder them, bringing some words on Corey chercher timers, they make some words earlier. What happens to him? The most tenth moves of a month tootta. It barelyanyans. This often happens while he binette and he gets at it.