 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on scaling into a trade. I'll begin by talking about who scales in and why they scale in. Next, I'll move on and talk about scaling into a winning trade. I'm going to use this slide to illustrate scaling in to a winning or a losing trade. We have a bull trend and then a bear channel, which is also a bear trend. Scaling in is a technique that traders should consider using after they have some experience trading. And preferably after they've become consistently profitable. It's difficult for beginners. It's tempting because they understand that it can increase the probability of success. But whenever you increase your probability of success, you additionally increase your risk. Also, there are added decisions that you have to make. And sometimes you have to make them quickly. And one of the common mistakes that beginners make is they don't know when to get out or they refuse to get out. Their losses start to grow. They no longer are objective. They manage their trades incorrectly. And then they end up losing much more money than they ever expected. However, strong trends do offer great opportunities for traders to scale in, add on to their position as the trade continues. For example, at the beginning here, we have five consecutive bull bars and then we have a little pullback and then we have a breakout. So it's a strong bull breakout. So it's a strong bull breakout. It's reasonable to buy here. And your stop goes below the bottom of the bull trend down here. And if you're still long at this point, we have another breakout, another bull flag, three-bar pullback. But then we have a bull bar. So it looks like the trend is resuming. You can buy on a stop just above the high of that signal bar. So now you have a bigger position. Every time there's a strong breakout, especially to a new high, traders raise their stop to just below the low of that new leg up. One of the most important things when scaling into a trade is trading the appropriate size. And it's often much smaller than you think. And I call it the I don't care size. You have to trade so small that you really do not care. You need to remain objective. And you can only remain objective as long as you're not thinking about money. And instead you're thinking about the trade. Am I doing what is right based upon the charts, not based upon a growing loss in my account, or not based upon my risk increasing because of my increased position size? Traders starting up often cannot remain objective and therefore scaling in is emotionally too difficult for them and they need to wait. Every trade eventually ends. Every trend eventually ends. Here we have a micro channel lasting about eight or nine bars. That's a breakout on a higher timeframe. Here's another breakout, even stronger. And then look at this. We have an even stronger breakout. So we have consecutive biclimaxes there, a bigger one here, and an even bigger one here. This one is the biggest one occurring after 20 bars in a trend. Whenever that happens, it's more likely that it is the final leg of the trend or near the final leg of the trend and the trend is about to reverse. A breakout that strong often has one more push up before it tries to reverse. Selling a first reversal down, especially below a bull bar or at the bottom of a tight trading range is usually not a high probability trade. However, after the market has one, two, three, four bear bars, three of them closing on their lows and having a decent sized body. Then we have a big up, big down, big confusion set up. Probably the best the bulls will get over the next 10 or 20 bars is a trading range rather than a resumption of the bull trend. Because of that, bears are starting to sell. For example, they'll maybe sell this close. And because it might be a trading range, they have to put their stop above the high. It may also be a bear trend. On the higher timeframe chart, this five bar bear channel is probably a breakout. So we might get a spike, pullback and channel, which we did. Traders will sell. Some traders will sell the close of that fourth consecutive bear bar. Some will sell the close of that third or even the second when the two bars are as big as they are in closing their lows. This bar close below the past six or seven bars. And we have a wedge. You can call it a wedge. One, two, three. Also, very strong bull breakout. Strong enough for a second leg up. That's the second leg up. And it is not strong. So traders are expecting a reversal. Strong enough leg down. Bears will put their stop above the top of the bear leg. And if you're looking at the top of the bear bar, it's still a trend. It's probably a significant trend that has consecutive buy climaxes or a wedge. One, two, three. Traders are expecting two legs down. One. And then pull back. And then two. Some traders will wait for a bear bar like this. A weak rally. Two legs up. One, pull back. Two. And they'll sell below the bear bar. Or maybe they'll sell here. A wedge. One. Two. Three. So small wedge, lower high, major trend reversal. Bull trend, strong bear breakout, weak rally, testing the prior high. So traders are looking for a second leg down and they'll sell both there. So they sold here. They're losing money and they add to their losing position. But when they're selling here, they knew their stop was up here and they knew they may want to sell more higher. So they traded small enough so that this position plus this position would not create too much risk using a stop up here. When they sell higher, their average entry price now is in between the two. So their average entry price is right here. Whenever you add to a losing position, you're only doing it if your premise is still valid. It increases your probability. But whenever you get high probability, you have to pay for it. And the other side of probability is risk reward. If you're going to create high probability, you're going to pay for it with worse risk reward and usually with greater risk. So you're doubling your position size. So you're increasing your risk. Some traders, when they're increasing their position size and it's a losing position, they've given up their hope of making a profit. Instead, they've changed their goal. Instead of hoping for a profit, they're simply trying to reduce or eliminate their risk. So for example, let's say an optimistic bull did not think about this as being a likely exhaustion bar. And instead, he saw a pullback one, so a high one, and then a high two, a small double bottom, and he bought above that bar. And then he starts to see this and this, and he said, oh my gosh, it's not good. It's pulling back. But after a strong bull trend, the first reversal down usually results in a trading range and not a bear trend. Maybe it's safe to buy more lower. That's his stop at the bottom of the most recent bull breakout. Now he has a strong bear reversal. And he knows when a reversal is that strong, the market probably will have a second leg down. And he also sees the consecutive buy climaxes and the reg three pushes up, one, two, three. So he expects two legs down after such a strong bear reversal. However, he also knows that it was reasonable taking this buy. Usually if you do something that's reasonable and then you manage your trade properly, usually by scaling in using appropriate stops, you can either make a profit or avoid a loss. So what a bull might do is buy here, sit through the bear trend. It's around a 50% pullback. And he waits for a bull bar. And then he buys above that bull bar. Or he might say, oh, five bear bars. Maybe I better wait for a second entry to buy. So maybe he'll buy above this bar or that bar. However, his goal at this point is not to make a profit. He believes that the market's going to have a lower high and a second leg down. But he also believes doing this was rational and buying above a bull bar is rational. So the market will probably let him out break even. He's buying here, hoping to exit exactly at the midpoint of his two entries here and here. That's his first entry, just a little bit above that bar. The second entry is a little bit above this bar. And the average entry price is right here. He might place a limit order to get out at that average entry price. If it's not filled, and then we get a micro double top, up, pull back, up. He'll then get out below the load of that bar. By taking the second entry, he either eliminates his risk if he got filled there or he reduces his loss. So he eliminates his loss, gets out break even on his trade here if he gets filled. If he does not, he'll get out here and he'll still have a loss but it will be a much smaller loss because he scaled in here. The bears are thinking the same thing. Wedge top, strong bear reversal, two legs down, so they're looking to sell a lower high. So they'll sell exactly where the bulls are getting out. We have a micro double top, four or five bars up, a reasonable sell. And it's a 50% pullback. I talked about 50% pullbacks in my other videos. At 50%, the risk for the bears is here and minimum reward is here. About the same. And for the bulls, their risk is here, their reward is here. But in this particular situation, the odds are we're going to have a second leg down. Yes, the risk and reward is equal for the bulls and for the bears. But the bears have higher probability. So it's a reasonable short. The bears will sell a 50% pullback, either with a limit order or on the reversal down. Whenever traders scale in, they have to have a plan. How many times are they going to add to their position? And what intervals? How far apart will their entries be? What size? And then they also have to know when they plan to exit and if they're planning to exit with a profit or a loss or a break even. I talked about adding to a winning position in a strong trend. buying here, stop here and then buying more higher. New stop. And I talked about adding to a position where you're probably going to lose money and you're trying to avoid a loss. I also talked about adding to a losing position. Bears selling here expecting that it's such a strong reversal after a wedge the market's going lower probably at least to the bottom of the buy climax and it probably will have two legs down. It may just go straight down. It may bounce first. But in either case the bears know the probability is they're going to make a profit. They sell here thinking that okay, I'll put a stop up here but I'll trade small enough so that if in fact we enter a trading range I can sell more higher and then either avoid a loss or make a profit. The bear sells here. He has a losing position at this point. He sells more here stop up here and he trades small enough so that if that stop gets hit his entire position will not result in a loss any bigger than he would get on any other trade. and if he held for a swing he ended up making a nice profit. Now, who scales in? Professional traders do it all the time. For example, a fund manager like billionaire Kyle Icon Warren Buffett for that matter might be scaling into positions as he's trying to take over a company he may increase his stake even as the company loses money and loses value. Here's an example with Carl Icon. In December of 2015 CNBC reported that Icon added to his losing position in LNG for the eighth time even though it had fallen more than 50%. It kept falling and falling and falling but he believed it was undervalued and that it would reverse off. He added to his losing position position eight times but each addition did not increase his position size to an uncomfortable level. He was able to remain objective. Individual investors also scale in. If you ever watch Kramer on Fast Money he'll sometimes tell you buy part of your position now and then wait a few days and buy part more. dollar cost and then you also hear about averaging down or dollar cost averaging which is a very common sensible approach to investing for individual investors like buy a tenth of your position this month and then no matter what the stock or market is doing buy a tenth more next month and you do it for 10 months and that is scaling in. You might be scaling into a winning position you might be scaling into a losing position but dollar cost averaging is a common sensible way for long term individual investors to enter the market. And then another group of traders who scale in regularly are short term traders traders holding positions for a few days a few weeks and day traders. Here we have a pretty strong rally a very tight bull channel probably the first reversal down will be limited stop down here if this is a bull trend it should not fall below the bottom of the most recent strong bull breakout some traders might buy here with the intention of putting a stop below here and if it pulls back they'll buy more one way to do it is you could buy with a limit order below that bear bar betting will not fall below here or they'll simply buy more 10% lower or a certain number of ticks or pips lower or they'll also buy on the reversal up we have an II bull flag after a strong reversal up from a higher low I mentioned dollar cost averaging investment advisors often tell their individual clients do not buy the entire position at one time instead divide your entire account up into pieces like for example 10 pieces or 12 pieces and then you buy each piece every month or so until you have your full position for example if this were a stock let's say it's XYZ stock and you wanted to buy 10,000 units of the stock or 10,000 units of a forex position and you're planning to hold for a number of years five years instead of buying all 10,000 units or shares or contracts all at once you might go ahead and buy right when you make your decision so let's say sometime in here you're deciding yeah I really want to own this and I want to hold it for a long time but I don't want to buy the full 10,000 units right now because suppose it just keeps falling all the way down here then let's say it falls 20% then it has to go back up 20% for me just to get break even so maybe I'll just buy part of my position if it goes up higher I'll buy part more higher I'll buy part more higher and instead if it goes down I can add to my position relying on my stock here or here as long as my premise is still valid that I think it's going to go up I'll be comfortable adding to my position so let's say he started buying right here and then he bought another thousand here thousand here thousand here thousand here all the way every month he bought a thousand here ten months this would be his average entry price even though he started buying here his average price now is here and that's including after a sell-off now he's got a sell-off and a reversal and he has a reasonable entry price now that we have that reversal and the advantage to the trader is he avoids the uncertainty possibly buying too high so he increases his probability of profit because he's getting an average entry price a price between the high and the low over the next year instead of possibly buying the high over the next year and hoping for it to go higher this is a common situation here we have a bull microchannel six seven eight bars and a beginner will look at that and say yeah it's going up and he believes it'll continue to go up as long as it stays above the bottom of the most recent strong last leg up so let's say he buys for any reason the sixth close buys below that low buys above this high buys a bear bar betting that the first reversal down will fail his stop goes down here if he's looking to buy up here and the stop is too far away he can wait to buy where a scale end trader might add to a position and still use that correct stop for example he might say well I don't want to buy up here the risk is too great I'll buy a pullback maybe a 50% pullback so then my risk would be half of what it would be had I bought up here that's okay the only problem is sometimes you don't get the pullback so let's say right here you are planning on buying looking for a 50% pullback you don't get any pullback until all the way up here which is a much worse price had you bought right here he waits for a 50% pullback and now he sees a pretty good reversal from a higher low strong reversal bar down up good reversal II with a bull bar and you can add to his position here after a micro double bottom down up down up micro double bottom with a strong reversal up day traders short term traders they'll scale into losing trades to increase their probability of profit and reduce their chance of a loss again whenever you try to increase your probability you have to pay for it anytime you're going to get something good you have to pay for it nothing is free and usually when you increase your probability you're going to increase your risk you're certainly going to reduce your risk reward ratio usually greater risk and sometimes less reward so let's say a trader buys expecting a continued rally even if there is a deep pullback as long as the pullback remains above the bottom of the most recent bull breakout so that's his premise that it's a bull trend as long as there's not a credible top this is not a credible top and as long as any pullback no matter how strong remains above the bottom of the bull leg you might buy here you might buy the second below these bars we have a follow through bar some bears will think this is always in short but as long as it remains above this low I'm going to bet that this breakout will fail and that it's a bear trap trapping bears into selling this close selling what might turn out to be the bottom of a pullback in a bull trend he might buy that close knowing that weak bears will sell the close hoping to break below here but he still believes this trend is so strong any reversal attempt even a strong one consecutive bear bars closing on its low will fail so he'll buy more lower if he's sufficiently disappointed by the strength of this bear reversal he might decide okay maybe we're going to go sideways instead of up here's my first entry price here's my second entry price here's my average entry price I'll place a limit order to get out break even so if he buys here and immediately places a limit order at the midpoint of his two entries he might get out here in that case he would be averaging into his trade to avoid a loss and not so much to make a profit however he could hold and he would end up with a very nice profit another buy more here and then try to make a profit on the second entry and get out break even on this first so he buys here and immediately places a limit order to exit the entire position at his first entry so he gets out break even on this trade and then with a profit on this trade that's another common approach the traders use now I'm going to talk about scaling into a winning trade strong bull trend a bull might buy a pullback an attempt at a reversal but then the reversal looks like it's going to fail the bull might buy the resumption up from the pullback so the breakout above the pullback bar stop obviously at the bottom of the bull breakout and he might add to his longs as the market continues to rally he could buy for any reason but he wants the space between each of his entries to be at least as big as a minimum scalp so he doesn't want to buy and then buy later at the same price if he's going to be buying as the market is going up he wants the second entry to be at least the size of a scalp more than the first entry and he has to keep calculating his total risk based upon the position size and his stop and he has to make sure that his risk remains within his comfort zone another bull flag another bull breakout above the bull flag buy more we have a bull breakout to a new high put the stop below that new bull breakout which is above his first entry price so now he has entered twice his position is twice as big as it was initially and his stop now is around his first entry another bull flag a high two bull flag two small legs down one pull back two and then we have a bull bar maybe he'll buy more on the resumption up here this looks like we're getting small bars doji bars and might be forming a tight trading range so his premise might change at this point he might be thinking well maybe I'm buying a bull channel instead of a bull breakout maybe I'll start using a tighter stock especially if the position is getting big if his premise is still valid that it's now a bull channel instead of a bull breakout it still should form higher lows so if he's been adding on and now has a large position very strong bull breakout traders have to be very quick to reduce their position size to a normal position size if the breakout is no longer a strong bull breakout if it starts to convert into something else like a bull channel or trading range an experienced trader will be very good at detecting a loss of momentum and a possible transition into a channel or a trading range if at any point their premise is no longer valid they'll exit their entire position so if they buy here and buy more here and buy more here they're buying it on the premise that perhaps it's a breakout they may continue up much higher before it transitions into a channel however if the market does something to make them question that premise that the breakout will continue a long time they'll be quick to get out here we have one push up two pushes up possibly three pushes up to a parabolic wedge top and we might reverse at that point we got a doji here a small bar here a doji here that's looking different from this where we had consecutive bull bars consecutive bull bars consecutive bull bars the market's starting to look different we have a possible buy climax and a tail and a doji a small bull bar and then a doji bar and then a possible parabolic wedge one two maybe we'll just go up a little bit and form three and then start to reverse down when traders see that they're thinking that maybe the market is transitioning from a strong bull breakout phase into either a trading range or a channel again look at the character of the bars a bear bar now we have not had a bear bar since here small bar this bar is below that bar here we have been pulling back for five or six bars a breakout with shrinking bodies and then a doji small doji doji small bar so these bars over the past 10 bars are different from these bars so the premise of a strong breakout has changed this is no longer a strong bull breakout it's a bull channel but it might also be a trading range we could easily trade back down here when you start to see smaller bars overlapping bars the channel the slope of this is not as steeply up as is this beginning tight trading range price action here here here in fact the entire thing might be part of a big tight training range so at that point now we have a wedge possibly wedge higher high major trend reversal bull trend small breakout wedge it's still a small pullback bull trend at this point but it's no longer a breakout a trader might want to reduce his position back down to a normal position size at this point had he bought here and then added here so a double position and then added here so a triple position at this point he may cut back down to a normal size position or 30 or 40 bars no profit exiting entirely would make sense here we have a very strong bear trend it's a sell the clothes bear trend at this point or that point it's a sell the clothes bear trend traders are selling they'll sell that clothes this clothes this clothes they'll sell the bull clothes they'll sell that clothes this clothes this clothes here are examples of possible entries they can add on they can just keep they take a position here sell more here sell more here you're not going to sell more here if you sell here because this is not at least a scalp size below this a lot of traders will take one of these trades maybe one or two a lot of traders will take one scalp out and then take the next one but let's say you're adding to your position and you take two or three of those then fine you're going to be trading small enough so that a stop up here will not create so much risk that you will not manage your trade properly and so much risk that you have a greater risk than you have on any other trade and most traders cannot think fast enough to sell sell more sell more sell more and they should only take one of these entries doesn't matter which one any one and use the appropriate stop and just hold for a swing until there's a pretty strong reversal up and then get out down here some traders will sell here or here and then see these additional entries instead of adding them to their swing position they might scalp so you sell here here I'll sell this one for a scalp here is another sell I'll sell this one for a scalp another sell I'll sell for a scalp so they hold their initial swing entry and then they scalp additional entries and then other traders as I said some experts will just keep adding to their position until they believe their premise is no longer valid low one low two so low one or low two bear flag here we have a pause bar we went above it so this is a pullback and that makes this a low one sell signal bar so some traders will sell below the low of that bar on the reversal down there are many ways to sell in a bear trend as I said earlier if you're scaling into a winning trade you want the next entry to be at least a scalp below the first one so if a scalp in the e-mini is one point you don't want to be selling again unless you're one point lower consecutive sell climax is climax big trend bar so a climax big trend bar so a climax so if you were scaling in and you see consecutive sell climaxes you know there's a risk of a pullback or maybe even a trading range it's a good time to reduce your position or possibly even get out entirely and then wait for another sell signal before selling again we had a strong breakout and then we got consecutive sell climaxes so the premise of a strong breakout is no longer valid look at this the strongest pair of bear bars occurring 20 bars into a trend you have to be thinking about the possibility of an exhaustion gap a final sell climax and the end of the trend so whenever you see the strongest pair of bear bars occurring late in a trend you have to be thinking that 75% chance the gap between this close and this will probably close it's probably an exhaustion gap not a measuring gap for a measured move down so that is a good reason for bears to exit smart bears will buy back their shorts here it's no longer sell to close we have consecutive cell climax it's 1 2 3 4 5 and then 6 and we have a huge cell climax very late 20 or more bars into the trend the bears know it's probably not going to go much further and in fact we'll probably get a couple legs sideways to up so a smart bear would buy back his shorts here and a smart bull aggressive bull would buy here other bulls will wait to buy the reversal up but they could buy here and then put a stop down here maybe based upon a measured move down from here thinking that strong enough maybe we get a small second leg down but if we do get a second leg down we'll probably then reverse either reverse here or here or maybe we have one more small leg down and then we reverse if you're adding to a losing position you only want to add to your position if you believe that your original position is still valid so let's say you look at this and say oh it's bull trend it's not all that strong we have tails we have bear bars tails this looks like a bull trend and what will end up as a trading range but it may go up much higher before it begins the trading range it's okay to buy here if you're willing to put a stop all the way down below the bottom of the bull leg putting it down below the bottom of the buy climax is not good because if this is a bull leg and what will become a trading range it usually will fall below the bottom of the final buy climax trader buying up here he knows he's buying in a weak rally that's probably a bull leg and what will become a trading range he sees the wedge top he could buy hoping that we go up a little bit further and he can make a profit or he can buy knowing that we may pull back deeply because if it's a trading range we can get a very deep pull back however if it's a broad bull channel the deep pull back should stay above the bottom of the most recent leg up a trader buying up here only buys up here if he's going to put a stop down here strong bear reversal we're not in a broad bull channel or any kind of a bull trend instead we could be in a trading range or in a bear swing most traders they've got a bear breakout pullback and now we have a low two short low one low two most traders should get out either on that close above this bar below that bar below this bar and then just wait but some traders will hold and put their stop down here and then look to buy a reversal up lower just like the rally had problems it was weak look at the sell off a big bear bar but a disappointing follow-through bar and a doji bar doji doji small bar doji doji just like this looked like a bull leg in what would become a trading range this looks like a bear leg in a trading range and not the start of a strong bear trend a bull who bought here might hold long stop down here some traders don't like to be getting in getting out getting in getting out they just buy and hold as long as their premise is still valid and they use an appropriate stop which is often very wide a scale in bull who bought here with the intention of scaling in lower as long as his premise was valid he buys here with a stop down here but he is buying small enough so that he can buy again on a reversal up above a bull bar or above here a double bottom higher low so he buys here and buys more here or here stop here but he makes sure that he's trading small enough so that his combined position does not create more risk than any other trade so if he bought here and he bought more here or here stop down here as I said earlier these scale in bulls often exit the entire position back at the original entry so they get out break even on the first entry and then with a profit on their second entry whichever two it was a bull who buys here and he places his limit order to get out of his entire position here break even on the first profit on the second and then he sees this it starts to become a buy the close bull trend he might decide to only exit half of his position here because this is such a strong bull breakout we're probably going higher biggest bull bar in a rally that's lasted probably an exhaustion gap so the gap between this close and this high probably will close so we'll probably reverse down below that high and then we have a bear bar here and a parabolic wedge we're having a bull breakout above a bull channel probably going to fail and go at least sideways to down so at this point the premise is no longer valid that the bull trend is still in here because bears will be selling there looking for at least two legs down in this video I talked about traders who do scale in and that includes everyday individuals trading their own account at home when they do dollar course averaging next I moved on and talked about scaling into winning trades this is Al for watching the Brooks trading course this is the end of video 35 a scaling in it's the first of two videos on scaling in