 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of seven videos on protective stops. I'll begin by answering the obvious question, why use stops? And the answer is to protect yourself mostly against yourself. A stop is useful in determining what your position size would be. Since the distance to your stop is a measure of your risk, that allows you to determine what your appropriate position size should be. Experienced traders always have protective stops. In the market, not just in their heads. The purpose of a protective stop is to protect you and to protect you against many things. For example, there may be some surprise move that is much bigger against you than what you expected. There may be problems with your computer, with your internet connection, problems with your broker, problems with the exchange, all kinds of problems. And a stop does give you a high degree of protection, not absolute, but a very high degree of protection. Most importantly, a stop protects you against yourself. Traders often get emotional, especially when they're starting out, and they get hopeful. The market starts to go against them, and they don't want to take a loss. They keep the stop in their head, not in the market. The market goes through the stop in their head. They create a new fictitious stop, and the losses just keep growing as the trader never exits the losing trade. A stop means that you have to stop what you're doing. It's absolute. You get out. And take the loss if it's a loss, but you get out. Don't question whether you should get out, whether you should move your stop. You put your stop where you put it because it made sense at the time you put the trade on. And if the market's going against you, and you're now questioning whether your stop is in the correct place, you're probably getting emotional. And that's the very thing the stop is designed to prevent. It's designed to prevent you from allowing emotions to influence your decisions. So let your stop be hit if it's going to be hit, and don't move it. Simply get out and wait for the next signal, knowing that losing is part of trading, and the protective stop keeps you from losing too much. I think it's very important to understand that when you're managing a trade, it has nothing to do with where you entered the trade. It has only to do with what the market is currently doing at the moment. Every instant that there's a new tick on the chart, up or down, you have new information. And the management is based upon that new information, not based upon where you entered. It doesn't matter if you buy here or buy here, the stop is still there. For example, you could buy any one of these bull flags. Anytime you enter the market, there are usually several reasonable choices for stops. For example, if you buy here or here, you could put a stop here, arguing that you have a high two, high one, high two. You do not want it to fall below the bottom of the high two bull flag. However, you have a strong reversal up, and this is a major higher low, a breakout to a new trading range high. Not a breakout to a new high in the chart, but a strong breakout to a new trading range high. This is also an appropriate stop. If you buy here or here, this is a good place for a stop. This is also a good place for a stop. Let's say the market started to go up and you're at this point, or if you buy here. Most traders would put their stop below this low. This is a major higher low. We have a strong breakout and a new high. Anyone who is holding long after this breakout takes place, you would have a stop here. It doesn't matter if you bought here or here, or if you bought here. At this point, the stop for all of those traders probably is going to be right here. Again, it doesn't matter where you buy. Stop placement is determined by what the market is currently doing. And once you've had a strong breakout to a new high in a bull channel, it's usually better to put your stop below that low. After this strong breakout and follow through, if the market falls below that low, then your premise of a bull channel is probably no longer valid. The market then would either be in a trading range or possibly even in a bear trend. And therefore, since your premise is no longer valid, you get out. Again, it doesn't matter where you bought. If you bought up here, if you bought down here. Once you've seen this and the markets now up here or anywhere in here, this is a good reasonable location for your stop. We have a higher low major trend reversal, bear trend, bull breakout, higher low. You can also call it a head and shoulders bottom. We have a breakout 50% pullback. A strong breakout. Two legs down, one, two. Second entry buy. You can call it a wedge. Three pushes down. High one, high two, high three. In any case, you have a very good looking buy signal bar and a higher low around the 50% pullback of this leg up. It's a reasonable buy. A lot of traders only think of stops as either being very wide or very tight. Some traders use other terms as well. For example, a trader buying above here, you could put a stop here, which is fairly tight. I would call that a price action stop. You're placing the stop based upon the current price action. You have a wedge bull flag, a high two at the second entry buy, a very strong bull signal bar. That's a reasonable place to put your stock based upon the current price action. So is this. This is a major higher low, a break to a new high above this high, and a strong rally. The market should not fall below this low if it's in a bull trend. If it falls below this low, then the market's not in a bull trend. It's either in a trading range or possibly a bear trend. Some traders like to use a money stop. For example, they might use a stop that is 10 ticks below their entry price, or 10 pips below their entry price in a Forex trade, or maybe $100 below their entry. Maybe 10 pips below or 10 ticks below the low of the signal bar. Some traders will look to scale in below. But anyway, the point is a money stop is based upon the number of ticks or pips or a dollar amount, rather than simply based upon the price action. Other traders just use very wide stops, and sometimes they'll be based upon the price action. For example, they might put a stop below the entire bull trend all the way down here, or they may use a stop that's several hundred dollars below their entry price, or 30, 40, or 50 ticks, 30, 40, 50 pips below their entry price. And that is an example of a wide stop, which could be a money stop or a price action stop. You could put a stop based upon a measured move. We have a strong breakout. It should lead to a measured move up or down. If the market starts to reverse, some traders will want to give the market room in case the market forms a trading range instead of a bear trend. A logical location for the stop would be just at or below a measured move down, usually just below a measured move down. Once the market starts to go your way, you raise your stop in a bull trend. And that is called a trailing stop. If your stop was initially here, then we got a breakout here. A lot of traders will put their stop below the most recent major high or low, which is right here. That's called trailing the stop up. After every strong breakout to a new high, raise the stop to below the bottom of that major high or low. Lots of decent stop entry buys in a bull trend. Most experienced traders will get out below the bottom of the most recent major high or low. Is this a major high or low here? I don't know. The breakout is not all that strong. Here we have a decent bull bar, decent follow through, and then an additional follow through. This is, I think, a fairly important price. As is this and as is this. These are all major higher lows here, here, and here. Most bulls, no matter where they bought, if they were still long up here, and we had this surprise bar, they would have a stop below this bar and they would get out right here. Some, instead, would have a stop down here or here. Once they saw this big bear bar, they would conclude the bear bar was big enough so that we would get at least a second leg down, and they would get out on the close of that bar. We have a spike and a pullback and then a channel. A spike and pullback bull trend. A lot of traders expect the market to come down to the bottom of the channel, maybe a little bit below. They'll put a stop several ticks or several pips below the bottom of the pullback, expecting the market to come down there. Other traders will assume that spike pullback channel will lead to a trading range. And the trading range can trade down here, but it will have a rally afterwards. They'll instead use a wider stop below the bottom of the bull trend instead of just below the bottom of the channel. Thinking that the market might fall below this low, but as long as it stays above this low, it probably will enter a trading range and therefore they could exit higher. If they're long from any of these entries and they hold through a pullback here betting on a bounce, they could get out with a smaller loss if they bought up here or with a bigger profit if they had bought down here. Everyone is naturally very hopeful, very understanding and very forgiving. And they assume that the market will behave consistent with those feelings. But that's not the way markets work. A beginner often thinks of a market as a person who does not realize that he is making a mistake. I think it's natural for a beginner to think of the market as a person. In every other aspect of life, you're interacting with people and now you're interacting with the market. You tend to personalize the market and think of it as a person. And a beginner, when he sees something like this, thinks the person, the market, is making a mistake, but he does not realize what a terrible mistake he's making. People tend to be forgiving and a beginner has a natural inclination to give the market a chance to fix its mistake, redeem itself and become a good person again. Maybe he'll look at this as a bear trap, a failed bear breakout. He'll come up with all kinds of reasons to deny that this is real. It's still above the bottom of the channel. It's still above the bottom of the bull trend. Maybe a beginner who is not using a stop will give the market more time. Maybe the market will see it's making a mistake and it'll go back up. Now we have a second bar and it has a bear body. That is follow through and it increases the chances that this is real and that the market is going to go lower. Let's take a look at a beginner who bought right here. And now the market's down here with a big bear breakout, well below his entry price. And we have a follow through bar as well, another bear body. The beginner does not want to exit a trade too early because he'll feel like a loser. And he knows that experienced traders are making money all day long. The beginner starts thinking about the personality traits of good traders, discipline, they're positive, they don't worry about losses. The beginner wants to think like a winner. All he's doing is trying to justify holding on to a losing position, a position that he really needs. He doesn't want to look at this as a reversal with follow through. And he doesn't want to believe that the market now favors the bears, the probability favors the bears. He just simply denies what's in front of him. We have a spike pullback channel. We have a huge bear breakout and a follow through bar. The odds are we're always in short, which means the probability is we're either going to go sideways or down. And the first rally traders will sell it and we'll go down. So he bought here. He sees the bear breakout and the follow through bar well below his entry price. He's still hoping that there's a chance that this will be a higher low and lead to trend resumption up. Even though if he was objective looking at this, he'd say, no, we're going down or at least we're going sideways. People want to be virtuous. Again, they want to personify the market. They want to think of the market as a person. And the beginner wants to allow the market to fix its bad behavior. The beginner wants to be forgiving because being forgiving is virtuous. And he wants to see himself as a good person. Again, these are just all the kinds of thoughts and feelings that beginners have to justify staying in a losing trade. They're all wrong. At any given instant, there's always a reason to be long and there's always a reason to be short. But sometimes one side has a terrible probability, a very low probability of success. The beginner who bought up here and now is sitting with a loss. He wants to pretend that he's being objective and that he's analyzing this just the way any professional trader would look at it. He comes up with all kinds of plausible reasons to justify his staying long. There's follow through, but it's only a doji body and it's still a higher low above the bottom of the channel, above the bottom of the spike. Maybe if he holds on, he'll get a bounce that will allow him to get out with a smaller loss. Maybe it'll bounce back above his entry price and he'll be able to get out break even. The beginner is going to come up with every possible thing that he can conceive of to avoid thinking about the real reason why he's holding long when the market's clearly bearish. Why do you think the beginner is holding long? He bought here and now the market has done this. Why is he holding long? There's one reason. Why is he holding long? He's afraid to take a loss. Because if he takes a loss, he sees himself as a loser. And if he takes enough losses, his account will slowly disappear. He's afraid of the death of his dream of becoming a successful professional trader. That is the fundamental issue. And he's coming up with all kinds of reasons to avoid that thought. But that is his thought. He's afraid of death, the death of his dream. He's got to get over it. When you trade, you're going to lose. You're going to lose some of the time. And as you get better, you lose less often and your losses become smaller. But even experienced traders are going to lose some of the time. And you can't dwell on the losses. You have to make the correct management decisions and you have to rely on your stock. The beginner is still long. He sees a bear bar, a doji bar, a bear bar, a bull bar. And he's arguing, oh, consecutive sell climaxes were still a higher low. Maybe we'll get a 50% bounce and I can exit with a smaller loss. It's a mistake. It's all a justification. He's just simply denying what's in front of him, hoping that he will not be forced to take a loss. Maybe he can lower his stop down here. The next logical support area, the bottom of the bull trend. Spike pullback channel. He's thinking calmly that, okay, I want to stay objective. I want to think about this the way the pros would think about it. And the pros certainly could manage their way out of this trade and avoid a loss. But that's not true. Pros take losses. When the market is going against them and their firm is no longer valid, we take our losses. You know, the pros know when they're wrong and they just get out with a loss when they're wrong. And they don't worry about it. If just accept that nothing is 100% probable, even the best things are only 60% probable, that means you're going to be wrong 40% of the time. That's part of the business. When you're wrong, you exit. Now we've had a breakout to a new low of the day. Four consecutive bear bars here. Consecutive sell climaxes. It's probably going to collapse them to the end of the day. The beginner thinks, okay, I better just admit that I'm wrong and take my loss. He thinks he traded just like a pro. He gave the market room. This is just one of those situations that even an experienced trader would lose money. And he finally ends up taking his loss on the breakout to a new low. We're clearly in a strong bear trend. On the other hand, when I look at this, I'm thinking, hmm, big bear bar, probably at least a small second leg down. Another big bear bar looks like probably a little bit lower. But now we have consecutive sell climaxes here, here, a two bar sell climax here, another sell climax here. And look at the follow through, a doji, a bull bar, a bull bar. This looks like a bare leg in what will become a trading range. So we'll probably bounce soon. Also, it's an expanding triangle. Low, low, lower. Not a good shape, but still an expanding triangle. And it's also possibly a breakout below a developing trading range. Beginner is looking at this as the end of the world. And he cannot just stay long anymore. He bought high. The market's now very low. He just lost way too much money. But that's not what an objective, experienced trader is going to see. He's going to see a series of consecutive sell climaxes and a new low. This is probably a bare leg in what's going to become a trading range. And therefore, traders are expecting 10 bars, two legs up pretty soon. And they're starting to look to buy. And this is what we've got. The beginner exited his long down here and the break to a new low. And the experienced trader is looking at trading range price action, spike pullback channel, and probably a conversion into a trading range. And therefore, once the channel has gone on and has had several legs down, it probably is going to go up. The opposite of this, spike pullback channel, after several pushes up, it's probably going to go down. No one left to sell at this price and the weak bulls finally gave up. The bulls who bought all through here and did not get out when the market told them they were wrong, they finally give up. The strong bulls are never going to give up. They're going to hold and buy more as the market goes down. The bears who did sell up here or through here are expecting the market to bounce soon as well, and they're taking profits. So the strong bears are taking profits. They want to sell higher. No one left to sell at this price and the result is a rally. Strong bears sold here, sold here, take profits, and do not want to sell again one or two bars later. They want to sell high. And therefore, there's a buy vacuum. There's an absence of sellers at this price and the market gets vacuumed up to prior pullbacks. This high, maybe even this high. Spike channel down, consecutive cell climaxes. Probably we're going to get 10 bars, two legs sideways to up, maybe more. We have a microdouble bottom here, a second entry buy here, a bull bar here. Should get at least to this high, probably to that high. This is a reasonable buy, so we should get at least to that high. Bulls will buy for a test of that high, test of this high. Where you put your stop determines how much money you're going to risk. The amount of money that you're willing to risk always determines how big a position you should take. You never want to risk more on any trade than you would on any other trade. Whenever you're looking to enter a trade, you first look where your stop has to be. That determines your risk. That also determines how big a position size you can take. You can therefore adjust the size of your position based upon where the appropriate stop would be. And you rely on your stop as long as your premise is valid. If the price action tells you that your original premise is wrong, get out, take the loss, do not wait for your stop to be hit. On every trade, the total dollars that you're risking has to be no bigger than your comfort level. If you're thinking too much about the size of how much you can lose on a trade, you're not going to trade properly. You're not going to manage the trade properly. And you're going to lose money. You cannot be thinking about money. And therefore you have to trade small. You should always trade the I don't care size. Trade small enough so you really don't care very much if you lose. That way there, you can manage the trade properly and make objective decisions and do what those decisions tell you to do. For example, if you buy here a bull flag, bull breakout, wedge bull flag, high one, high two, high three. A good place for a stop is either right below the bottom of the wedge or below the bottom of the most recent bull breakout, a major high or low. The risk is from your entry price to the stop. That's your initial risk at least. And let's assume this is your average risk. Let's say this is as much as you're willing to risk on any trade. If this is your average position size and this is your average risk. You're buying in a strong bull trend. The probability is that the market's going to reward you with a profit that is at least as big as your risk. If you're buying here and this is a logical stop, 60% chance the market's going to go up that same distance before it gets to your stop. Because the probability is high, you can take a reward that's equal to one times your risk and still have a good traders equation. The math makes sense. We're buying here using the appropriate stop and then taking partial or full profits at that same distance up. It's more likely that the market's going to go that distance up before it goes that distance down. And therefore exiting with the reward equal to your risk makes sense. Let's say you're still long at this point. What do you see? You see a spike pullback channel. It's a nested wedge. Spike pullback channel. Spike pullback channel. We have a nested wedge. Different ways to draw the three pushes up. You have a series of biclimaxes. You know, one, two, three, four, five, six. I have four written here. One, two, three, but it's really five, six, seven, eight. A lot of consecutive biclimaxes. The odds are we're going to get a pullback pretty soon. The bears theoretically will sell below this bar, betting on at least ten bars two legs down. A lot of traders will not take the first sell. A lot of bulls, however, will exit on a second reversal down after a nested wedge top. Many of the bulls will get out here if they did not scalp out earlier. Aggressive bears would sell either here or here. Other bears would wait until they see the big bear break out or follow through and then sell, expecting at least a measured move down. Again, some bears will see the big bear break out, see the bear bar on the next bar and then sell the close, expecting a measured move down. If you take that short, your stop at a minimum is above the top of the bear breakout, the bear reversal, the bear cell climax, whatever you want to call it, or above the top of the bear trend. However, look at the size of the risk. I said if this is your average risk for your average position size, now if you take this sell, the risk is twice your average. And that means if you take this sell, you have to reduce your position size, because you want the total dollars at risk to be the same. If your stop is twice as far away, you have to trade a half of your normal position size, maybe even less. This stop location determines the size of the position of your short. Strong bear breakout and follow through. 60% probability you're going to get a measured move down based upon the distance to your stop. 60% chance if you sell here, the market is going to go down here, this distance, before it goes up here. Because it's a 60% probability of reaching a reward equal to your risk, you can take all of your position off, or part of your position off, at one times your initial risk. This is the distance, here's the same distance, reasonable location to take profits, and you can see a lot of traders did take profits here. Again, if you sold here, and used the correct stop, your risk is twice normal, your position size is half normal, but because your risk is twice normal, you need a profit that is twice normal as well, to make the trader's equation positive. I talked about the reason why traders use stops. Protective stops are to protect you against anything unexpected, and if you're a beginner, they're very useful to protect you against yourself. The stops location determines how much you have at risk, and that determines your position size. If the stop is twice as far away as you normally have it, you have to trade a position that is half of your normal size. I'm Al Brooks, thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This was the first of seven videos on protective stops. I'm Al Brooks, thanks so much for watching. I'm Al Brooks, thank you so much for watching. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks. I'm Al Brooks.