 I'm Al Brooks and thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on how to trade. In this video, I'm going to be talking about what markets can do. And when you look at a chart, it's often easy to come to the conclusion that the market has a very high probability of doing something. Whenever you have that feeling, you should pay particular attention to the market doing the exact opposite because whenever something seems like it has a very high probability, the probability is not nearly as high as you think. Take a look at this chart. The low of this bar is above the low of that bar. And for 16 bars, the market did that. It's a bull microchannel, no pullbacks. Chances are bulls have been buying at or above the low of the prior bar and now they finally get a chance to buy the low of the prior bar. Chances are they'll buy it. Yet, the market's telling you they're not buying it. Chances are means high probability there are buyers below. Yet, once you start to see two, three, four bear bars closing on their lows and the body's getting bigger, the market is telling you it doesn't matter what you thought was likely. If you keep denying that the market can go down and you keep buying, you're going to lose money. Price is truth. If the market's going down, you have to sell. It doesn't matter if it doesn't make sense. If it's going down, you have to sell. And as long as the trader is in denial that the market is doing something, he's going to be experiencing a lot of pain and it's called a pain trade. So whenever a low probability event starts to unfold, you cannot remain in denial. You have to look at the chart and say, hey, I know it's supposed to go up, but it's not going up. It's going down. And when that happens, no matter how unlikely something appears to be, you have to look at the chart and believe the chart. The price is truth. You know, not your instinct. You have to trade what you see, not what you expect to see or hope to see. So 16 bar bull micro channel. Yet a bear reversal. And by the time you get the third consecutive bear close on the low, especially with a bigger bear body, you have to be thinking it's going down. You get a sell. So you sell the close. That's a reasonable way to approach that. And then here we have a very tight bear channel. It's a bear micro channel to this point, seven consecutive bars without a pullback. Then we have a little pullback here and then down another bar. So it's a very tight bear channel, also a very strong channel. Chances are the first bull breakout will be a bear flag and will continue down. That's what the probability is. That is true. But that is not an absolute guarantee. If the market starts to have two, three, four, five consecutive bull bars, you have to say, oh, this is one of those times when there are not sellers above. It's going up. So at some point you have to decide that the probability is wrong. It's the low probability event is taking place. So you got to buy. Maybe the fourth or fifth close. You just buy the close and don't question that the market should not be doing what it's doing. It's doing it. You got to do what the market tells you it's doing. Price is truth, not what you believe probabilities are. Here are very strong outside down bar. Yet the next bar is a bull inside bar. So the market's going up. It doesn't matter if this is a big bear bar. The market's going up. You got to buy. And here we have a pair of very strong bull bars breaking above the top of this trading range. So theoretically, it's going up. Chances are this is a measuring gap, not an exhaustion gap. Yet once you start to see one, two, three bear bars, four bear bars, bodies getting bigger, closing on their lows, it doesn't matter what the probability is. It's going down. You have to sell. And then you have to sell. When I look at every chart, I classify each piece of price action into breakouts, tight channels, broad channels and trading ranges. So if the market's going up and it's going up strongly, no pullbacks, big bars closing on their highs. Here it's only one big bar closing on its high, but it's about a 10 or 15 bar bull micro channel. Very strong momentum. And when I see that, I'm going to buy. How am I going to buy? I'm going to buy for any reason. I'll buy it at the market when it's going up. I'll buy a bull close. I'll buy above the high of the prior bar. I'll place a stop order to buy above that bar. I'll buy a bear close, betting that the first attempt to reverse down will fail and that will continue higher. Look at this. We have a breakout here and then we have a pullback and another pullback and another pullback. So once a breakout begins to have pullbacks, it's then in a channel phase. And if the channel is very tight like this, it's basically a breakout. It is a breakout on a slightly higher timeframe chart. If this is a five minute chart and you look at the 15 minute chart, the 15 minute chart will look like this. And you're only going to be buying on the 15 minute chart. Well, five minute chart, not much different from a 15 minute chart. You should only buy. And you can buy for any reason. You can buy below bars, betting bear reversals will fail. You can buy above bars, betting that the trend resumption will succeed. You could buy bear closes. You can buy bull closes. Tight bull channel, treat it like a breakout. Only look to buy. Over time, even tight bull channels begin to get deeper pullbacks. And sometimes the pullbacks are so strong like here or here, the market becomes always in short. Yet, still higher highs, still higher lows. So it's still a bull trend because there are deep pullbacks. Bears can start making money. They can sell above prior highs and make money. Sell above this high, make money. They can even sell reversals down many times and make money. So this is basically a trading range that's sloped upward. And because it's a bull trend, you should buy. However, because the pullbacks are deep, you can also sell if you want to sell. In general, if you're selling in a broad channel, unless the reversals down are very big, most traders only scalp on the sells. On the buys, they can swing or scalp. So traders tend to scalp more, swing less. They buy pullbacks, 50% maybe. Midpoint of the last leg up, leg up around a 50% pullback. Trying to resume. You can buy that. Stop below here. But you can also sell. You can sell reversal down. You can sell at a prior high. And you can use limit orders. And you can scale in more. So you can buy for any reason. You can buy the reversal up here. Buy more lower. You can buy at that low. Buy more lower. Buy on the reversal up. In a trading range, it's very similar to a broad channel that is perfectly horizontal. You want to buy low, sell high, and scalp. You can buy as the market reverses up using a stop. You can buy at a prior low using a limit order. Borders will also sell, but they want to sell high in the top third of the range. They can sell at a prior high. Use a wide stop. Scale in higher. They can sell on a reversal down, especially a second entry short, a micro double top. Both bulls and bearers believe one thing. That the market is not going to go very far up or down. And therefore they scalp. They buy and they sell somewhere in the middle. They sell at the top and they buy back their shorts somewhere in the middle. Buy low, sell high, scalp. Traders are only interested in value. They're looking to buy low. It's cheap. They're looking to sell high. It's expensive. Unlike in a breakout when traders are trading momentum. You have momentum traders during breakouts buying high expecting it to go higher. And in trading ranges, traders are value traders. They want to buy low, not buy high. They want to sell high and not low. Now here are the corresponding bear charts. No pullbacks. A lot of bear bars closing below their mid points are on their lows. So strong bear momentum. And when that's the case, no matter where you sell, it does not matter because you're confident that the market's going lower. High probability of lower prices. So you can sell at the market. You can sell a bear close. You can sell below a bear bar. And then next, you have a pretty strong bear trend, but then a pullback and other pullbacks along the way. We have a breakout here. You have another breakout here. You can say the channel began with this pullback. You can say we have a breakout, another channel beginning with this pullback. It doesn't matter. On a higher timeframe chart, this looks like this. So this is basically a breakout. And because it's a breakout, traders should only look to sell. And again, sell for any reason. You sell above a bar, betting the bull reversal will fail. You sell below a bar, betting that the reversal attempt has ended and the market's going to resume down. You can take partial profits at new lows if you like. But you should be thinking about swinging most of your position. And then finally, we have a channel, lower lows, lower highs. But the reversals up can be pretty strong. In this particular case, the chart never really became always in long, but there were still pretty good reversals up. I would still call it a broad bear channel. It's a bear trend. So I definitely want to sell. Any pullback that goes somewhere in the middle of the prior leg down, I want to sell. So leg down somewhere in the middle, I want to sell. But you can also make money buying. So you can buy at the prior low, scale in lower. Also the bears, when they do sell, they'll tend to scalp more. So at every new low, they buy back their shorts and that creates another pullback. A bull buying here, he might buy more lower. And when it gets back to his first price, he gets out break even on his first entry and a profit on the second entry. And then I talked about trading ranges. So in a bear trend, every bear trend is made of some combination of these four things. A breakout, a tight channel, a broad channel or a trading range. And the bear trend on your chart, maybe you have 100 bars on the screen in front of you. It can be simply this the whole time, very unlikely. It could be this the whole time, very unlikely. It could be this or that the whole time, much more likely because broader channels and trading ranges are more common than strong breakouts. A strong breakout like this occurs maybe five to 10% of the bars on the chart. So it's a brief opportunity to get a very high probability trade. But the trade off for the high probability is risk. If you're selling here, your stop is up here. So your risk is greater. Yet you're doing that to get high probability. Now you already know that life is not fair. And I'm using this slide to illustrate an important point. When traders start out, they're always asking me, Al, what's your secret setup? I'll be really nice to you. And if you just tell me one secret setup that I can use to make a lot of money. And I promise I won't try to make too much money, but I do want to make enough to have a decent life. I want to feel like a successful trader. And they believe that Goldman Sachs or any hedge fund has these secret setups. And they don't exist. And if you look at a lot of websites, you'll see all these candlestick patterns that look like they're extremely profitable. It doesn't exist. You're trading against the smartest people in the world. And they're very competent. So any advantage that you have is always going to be small. It's a quixotic quest looking for a windmill. Looking for a perfect trade. It's just not realistic. And traders sometimes get frustrated. A lot of times I'll be talking about the market and I'll be talking about how the bears can make money and how the bulls can get money. And traders say, well, Al, you just don't know what you're doing. Take a position. But only during 10% of the bars on the chart is one side clearly having a big advantage. During 90% of the bars on the chart, if you know how to manage your trade, you can make money buying and you can also make money selling. I can make money buying here if I buy more here and then get out up here. I can make money selling here if I scale in here and get out down here. This would be probably more of a break even trade. But if you manage your trades correctly, most of the time, 90% of the bars on the chart, you can make money buying or selling. Just because you're working really hard does not mean you deserve to make money. Even if you're a nice person and polite and respectful does not mean you deserve to make money. You know, you can be a really rotten person and make a lot of money. It has nothing to do with your personal qualities. It simply has to do with your ability to structure and manage trades. It's just unfortunate that so many websites make it sound like trading is easy. Just read my website and follow these 10 rules and you're going to make money. You're not. You're not. You're not. Trading is a lot of work. And that's why this course has so many videos. Because if you really want to get good, you have to put a lot of time in. And the more you know, the better you're prepared to make money. So you look on the internet and say, oh, here's a bull reversal bar. They call it a hammer in the candlestick book. It's a buy. No, it's not a buy. It's occurring in a nine or 10 bar, bear micro channel. Chances are there are sellers above that bar, not buyers. You need to look at context. And the context is terrible for the bulls. The market's going down. I don't care if there's a bull bar there. Here we got a bullish piercing line. Who cares? All right. The channel down is very tight. The reversal up is probably minor. Next we have a bearish hanging man pattern. Do I want to be selling here? No, it's the bottom of a 20 bar trading range. I don't want to do that. And then here we have an outside up bar, a bullish engulfing line. Do I want to be buying here? We got a bad follow through on the way up. Bull bar, bear bar, bull bar, bear bar. We're stalling here. Micro double top. We're at a lower high. We have a very big bear bar here. Do I really want to be buying at the top of a trading range? No, trading range, you buy low. You don't buy high. So candlestick patterns are not enough. Here we got a bearish engulfing line. So is that a good sell? The channel up is too tight and there just are not enough bear bars in it. It's a low probability sell. Chances are you're selling in the bottom of a trading range. Learning a handful of candlestick patterns and expecting to make money, that's delusional. It's not going to happen. And those websites that make it sound easy, if you see any website that talks about trading is easy and making money is easy, you know the person is wrong. They're wrong. Leave the website no matter how appealing the website appears to be and no matter what promises they're making on the website. The key to making money is learning how to structure a trade. Where do I get in? Where's my stock? How do I get out of the trade? Do I scale in? How much do I risk? What's my profit goal? Right? How likely is it that my trade is going to be profitable? Okay. There's no one way to trade. There's no perfect way to trade. The goal of the videos is to show you many ways to structure trades that make mathematical sense. If you look at this chart, you say, well, I don't see anything there that looks all that good. That's what a normal chart looks like. It's filled with a bunch of stuff that doesn't look good. The probability is never as good as you want. Yet, if you look at the volume of this bar, the volume of this bar, the volume of even this bar, there's big volume on all of those bars. How can that possibly be if none of the bars looks like it's a great setup? It's because traders understand what they're doing and they're structuring trades and they can enter on any bar. It doesn't matter if I buy here or buy here or anywhere in between. If I think the market's going up, I'm going to buy. If I think it's going down, it doesn't matter if I take the first sell. If I miss the first sell, if I take a second or third sell, if I take a fifth or 10th sell, it doesn't matter. It's still going down. It's going to go lower. So it doesn't matter if I miss the first sell. I can sell on any of these bars. And that's one of the points I make throughout this course that there are countless ways to enter. The key is not your entry. The key is structuring your trade. Here's your stock. Where are you going to get out? What are you going to do if the market goes against you? That's what you have to do to make money. And you can enter on any bar. On an E-mini chart, for example, an average, a typical day, 81 bars. There are probably decent scalp setups on half of the bars. Scalps for a one-point profit. And if you're looking at a 15-minute chart or a 60-minute Forex chart where the average bar is more than 10 pips tall and you're looking at a screen with 100 bars on it, there are probably 15 or 20 trades where you can make 10 pips or more. But you have to know what you're looking for and you have to know how to structure the trade and manage the trade. I've talked before how we have a strong breakout here and only 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout. In a strong breakout, the probability is high that the market is going to continue in that direction. When the market is doing this, I only want to sell. If it's breaking strongly to the upside, I only want to buy. The other 90% of the bars, I could structure a trade to buy profitably or sell profitably. Here a very strong bear breakout. Climactic, a little bit bigger bar. Can you buy that sell climax and make money betting on a bounce? Well, you can. We've got a bear bar here, bad follow through, bear bar here, bad follow through here. In fact, you can make money buying at the end of this buy climax, betting that it will soon transition into a channel or a trading range. But you only make money buying here if you're using a wide stop, maybe a measured move down based upon the height of that entire leg to that point. And if you're willing to buy more lower. For example, buy below big bull bar, betting that the market's transitioning into a trading range. In a trading range, most breakouts fail. We're getting a break below that bull bar. It's probably going to fail. And then you expect the market to transition into a trading range. You buy here, you buy more here. And then you get out here. And look what happened when it got back to that price or near the high of that bull reversal bar. It sold off. Why did it sell off? Because a lot of bulls were selling. The bulls who bought either above that bull bar or that bear closed and bought more lower are selling out, taking profits, break even on their first entry, profit on the second. And guess what? The bears know the bulls will do that. So the bears will place limit orders to sell there. And that creates that brief sell down. Now, I said you can make money buying that close. Well, it's also a very strong bear trend. So you can sell that close as well, betting that you'll get a channel and you'll be able to make a profit on the way down. The market looks like it's trying to go sideways, tails, sideways bars, big bars. They bought below the low of this bar. They bought below the low of this bar. They'll probably buy the low of that bar as well. So you sell here, you buy back here, take your profits down here and you can make money selling. The traders who consistently make money, they're structuring their trades well. You can structure a trade at any point on any chart. Your plan has to make sense and you have to manage your trade well. For example, bear trend, pretty good bull breakout. And then a higher low, two legs down. So it's a higher low, major trend reversal. A pair of bear bars here, maybe you don't want to take the first entry. However, the second entry, higher probability. And also we have a double bottom attempt here. We got a bear breakout and we're reversing up. We're reversing up again for a second time. To me, it's a reasonable buy. Around a 50% pullback, a little bit higher. So it's a higher low, major trend reversal. Also a failed breakout below a double bottom. And this is second entry, first entry, second entry. There's the double bottom. So you buy here, maybe you put your stop here, maybe you put your stop down there. So is this a pretty good top? Should you get out down here? Well, you could. You know, you can argue three pushes up, failed breakout. But it's a pretty tight, bold channel. So it's probably a minor reversal. You can continue to hold and just take your chances that it's going to drift higher. The rules are not that complicated. When I trade, my first rule is don't lose money. Don't do anything stupid. My second rule, I make money. And my third and least important rule is I make a lot of money. And sometimes the third rule happens. But I really concentrate on the first two. I try not to lose money and I try to make money. Here are two time frames. Daily chart, five minute chart. You can sometimes reduce risk by entering on the five minute chart, even if you see a setup on the daily chart. Bear trend, a pullback. Resumption, and now we're coming back to the top of that pullback. The bears want a double top bear flag and a reversal down. A certain number of traders will take that short. Now, when I'm trading a five minute chart like this, I don't look too much at the daily chart because there are very few signals on the daily chart. And the five minute chart has lots of signals all day long. But sometimes when I see something like this on a daily chart, I'll look at the five minute chart to see if there's an entry. A lot of traders, they see this and they don't want to risk all the way up here. You know, a lot of times they'll try to enter on a smaller timeframe chart hoping that they'll reduce their risk and increase their reward. When you do it, you slightly reduce your probability as well. For example, here, you have a bear trend, you look at resistance, the top of the pullback, and then let's say you're a trader who likes trading the daily chart. And you look to sell near resistance, looking for a double top bear flag. Instead of selling below the bottom of yesterday's low, you might put up a five minute chart and enter on the five minute chart. Bear trend, 50% pullback. This line is this line right here. This is the five minute chart. Pretty strong rally, but a micro double top up, down, up, sell possibly below that bar. And it will give you an earlier entry than what you would get on the daily chart. Is it much of a reduction in probability? I don't know, probably not much, right? Higher probability to sell below the low of the prior bar on the daily chart. But here you can do it on the five minute chart. And you're greatly increasing your reward. And you're also greatly reducing your risk. Risk. So your risk is only up here, from here to here. Whereas if you sold on the daily chart, your risk, you'd be selling below the low of the prior bar. So probably somewhere down here. And your risk would be all the way up there. Pretty good reversal down. You can sell with a limit order at the 50% pullback. So bear trend, 50% pullback, possible double top, the top of the sell climax. So you can sell with a limit order right at that 50% pullback. Or you can say, oh, pretty good. Bear bar, a pair of bear bars. Probably this reversal up will fail and form a double top. So you can place a limit order to sell above the high of that weak bull flag, above that bear bar, or even above the bull bar. Or you can enter on a stop and sell the second reversal down. Here's the first reversal down. Here's the second reversal down. In any case, if you want, if you're a trader trading the daily chart and you're trying to reduce your risk, a lot of times you can look at the five minute chart and get an earlier entry with smaller risk and still pretty good probability. If you turn it into a day trade, we're getting near the end of the session. You can take partial profits at one times your initial risk. So let's say you sold here. Your initial risk is above the top of that bar. And this is about the same distance. So it's one time your initial risk and you can take partial profits there and then hold the rest into the close if you want. Here's a five minute chart and a one minute chart. Most traders who are using two timeframes, you know, you're finding the setup on the higher timeframe chart and then you're entering on the lower timeframe chart. Most of the traders who are doing this are looking at day session charts. Their higher timeframe chart would be maybe a 60 minute chart. And then they would look for an entry on the five minute chart. But you can also do it looking for setups on the five minute chart and then entering on the one minute chart. But I really think most traders should be totally ignoring the one minute chart because it's just too easy to make mistakes. If you're a very proficient scalper or consistently profitable scalper, sometimes you will put up a one minute chart and look for an early entry. But as I said, most traders should not do that. Most traders should never look at a one minute chart because even though when you print it out at the end of the day, it looks pretty easy. Real time, you just don't have enough time to make decisions and you'll make too many mistakes. Here we got a bare sell off. So a spike and then a channel. And leg one is this size and leg two started here. So at some point when it's going down, you decide this is the start of leg two. So you look for a measured move target, so leg one somewhere in here, you're thinking, oh, maybe it's a leg one leg two measured move. So you draw a line and then you look for the market reaching that target. You can also look and call the wedge one, two, three. Now on the one minute chart, this is the bottom of that wedge. And it's also at that leg one equals leg two measured move. If you're looking on the five minute chart, you might want to buy about the high of that five minute bar. But if you're very confident and you should be pretty confident, the market fell below this low and reverse up, getting a stairs pattern. The pullback is overlapping the breakout point. Chances are falling below this low, it's going to reverse up at least above that low. Traders are pretty confident and aggressive trader who, as I said, is consistently profitable, will sometimes look at the one minute chart and get an earlier entry. A little bit more reward. Here's the five minute chart. There's an entry on the one minute chart. That same entry would be right around there. If you were taking the trade on the five minute chart, you would get in here. If you pull up a one minute chart, you discover that you entered right there. But because of the context being so good, you could put up a one minute chart and take a one minute entry above the high of that bar. If this was an E-mini chart, you'd be buying maybe five ticks lower by buying here. And your risk would be lower, maybe down here. If it was a forex chart, maybe you'd be buying five pips lower. So your risk would be lower. And because there's more left to the trade, your reward would be higher. Probability is always a little bit less on a one minute chart compared to a five minute chart, but not all that much less. Where do you take profits? I'm going to get three pushes up a wedge, one, two, three, maybe a double top here. Possible double top here on the five minute chart. This is over here. Reasonable place to take profits on the reversal down from the wedge. Five minute chart, one minute chart, a bear chart. A strong bear breakout. You only want to be entering in the direction of the trend. I'm using an example of a five minute chart. You're looking for setups on the five minute chart, and then some traders will put up a one minute chart to get an earlier entry. But you can also look for setups on the 60 minute chart and then use the five minute chart for the earlier entry. Again, most traders should not be trading a one minute chart, but really skilled traders sometimes do that. Selling off pretty strongly so you can sell closes. Sell that close. Sell that close. Sell that close. Sell that close. And if you're looking at a one minute chart, if you pop up a one minute chart, sometimes you can get an earlier entry. The market's selling off. It's selling off here. Here's the one minute chart selling off. And instead of waiting for the close of the five minute bar, and you start to see three, four, five consecutive bear bars closing on their lows on the one minute chart, you can sell the close on the one minute chart. Also, even though there are no pullbacks here, on the one minute chart there are pullbacks. So you can sell at the high of the prior bar, betting that the reversal attempt will fail, become a bear flag, and be followed by lower prices. And the same here. So you can sell with limit orders above bars, betting that these bull reversal attempts will fail. And you don't even have these signals on the five minute chart, because there are no pullbacks on the five minute chart. If you're in a micro channel on the five minute chart, you can put up a one minute chart and then sell bull breakouts, betting that the bull breakouts will fail and that the bear trend will resume. You can also sell below bars. Bear trend, a pullback, it's a bear flag. Sell with a stop below the low of the prior bar. Again, you don't see any of this in the five minute chart because there are no pullbacks. So there are setups that you can see on the one minute chart. If you believe the five minute chart is strongly bearish and you can sell for any reason, well, then you can put up a one minute chart and sell for any reason as well. And sometimes there are patterns that you can see on the one minute chart that are not present on the five minute chart. In this video, I talked about some of the things that the market can do. And basically the market is in a strong breakout, maybe five to 10% of the bars on the chart. And then it's in channels, 90% of the bars on the chart channels or trading ranges channels can be tight. And if they're tight, you only trade in the direction of the trend. If they're fairly broad, you can trade in both directions. And then eventually a channel transitions into a trading range. And when the market's in a trading range, you buy low, sell high and scalp. No matter how certain you are that the market's going to do something, you should always assume that it can do the opposite. Because there's always an institution taking the opposite side of your trade. And you really need to be respectful of your opponent because he is just as smart as you are and he has good reasons for doing what he's doing. So if you only see one possibility, that means you're in a position to get trapped into a very painful situation, a pain trade. Always assume that the more certain something looks, the less certain it really is because there are no perfect trades. And price is truth. It doesn't matter what you believe. If the market is doing the exact opposite of what you believe, change your belief and trade what you see, not what you hope will happen. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the first of two videos on how to trade. And the two videos on how to trade with показ Reesti is worth hearing about the market wereometer 2 billion-Americanерг volumes. So it's a terrific movie. And this movie course just ob Thing a Blankardobeard is very ل Ally.