 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the second of two videos on how to trade. In this video, I talk about the market cycle. Every chart and every part of every chart is either in a breakout, a channel, or a trading range. And it's important to learn to recognize what the chart is currently doing because you trade differently depending upon what part of the market cycle the market is currently in. Next, I'm talking a little bit about the trader's equation and the 40-60 rule. 10% of the time, 10% of the bars on any chart are in a strong breakout, and traders should only trade in the direction of the trend. But 90% of the bars are either in a channel or a trading range. And when that's the case, there's a 40% to 60% chance that the market will go up. And if you structure your trades correctly and manage your trades correctly, you can make money buying or selling during 90% of the bars on the chart. Finally, I'm going to be talking about default targets. In case you cannot decide when you should get out of a trade, it's always good to have a rule. And I'll talk about some simple rules that traders can use to determine an appropriate mathematical time to exit a trade. The market cycle. The market is in a never-ending cycle. It keeps recycling the same patterns over again. And it's important to learn to recognize where you are in the cycle because you trade differently depending on what the market is doing. For example, we have a bear channel and then a reasonably good bull breakout. The bull breakout, you trade it one way. You only want to be buying when it's in a strong bull breakout. However, when it's in a channel, you always want to be buying. But sometimes if the channel is broad enough, you can sell as well. And then after a channel, it usually evolves into a trading range. If the legs in the trading range are reasonably broad, you can buy low, sell high and scalp. If the range is too tight like this, it's better to not trade at all. A big fallacy about trading is that there are really important times to enter. And those are the only times a trader should enter. But if you look at the volume on any bar on any chart on any timeframe, there's good volume all the time. And that tells you that institutions feel like any time is a good time to trade. And that is absolutely true. And if you learn how to read charts, you can structure trades pretty much on any bar at any time. As long as you structure the trade so that you have a positive trader's equation, the probability of winning times the reward is greater than the probability of losing times the potential loss. That is an acceptable trade. Although you can enter at any time in the market cycle during a breakout, during a channel, during a trading range, some traders prefer certain types of setups. Some traders prefer breakouts, some traders like channels, other traders like trading ranges. It doesn't matter if you're comfortable trading all three, trade all three. I think it's often helpful to try to structure binary decisions. Binary decision means give yourself two choices. Is it a bull trend or bear trend? Is it a bull leg and a trading range or is it a bull leg and a bull trend? If it's a bull trend, is it a breakout or a channel? And you trade it differently if it's a breakout or a channel. Bull breakout, you need to get long and you need to buy at least a small position and you buy for any reason. And in a channel, a lot of times traders prefer to buy pullbacks. So you get a pullback to around the middle of the last bull leg, you buy on the reversal up. A bull leg, a pullback, buy on the reversal up. Bull flag, buy the breakout. When a channel is reasonably tight like this, and it's a bull channel, it's usually better only to buy. By tight, I mean the pullbacks are only one, two or three bars. They don't drop down very far. It's much easier to make money as a bull than as a bear in a tight channel. And whenever the market's in either a breakout or a channel, especially a tight channel, it's good if you can swing at least part of your trade. Can you sell on a bull channel? Well, I would only sell in a bull channel if it's reasonably broad and if there's enough room for scalps. You know, because you don't want to be selling at this high and then have the market go up and never drop back below this high. This is a fairly tight channel and it's difficult to make money even selling this high. You sell here, try to buy for a scalp. When the channel is tight and the pullbacks only last one bar or so, it's harder to make money. In general, if you are selling in a channel, the first time you sell, it'll be limit orders. So you sell at the high of the prior bar, maybe scale in higher. And it's better only to do it if the market's in a stair pattern where the market breaks through a new high and then pulls back below the breakout point. Breaks above this high, pulls back below the breakout point. So you sell the high and you hope to make a scalp. Again, this channel is so tight, very difficult to make a scalp because the pullbacks are very small. In general, a tight channel like this, it's a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. It's usually better only to look to buy. A skilled limit order trader can sometimes make money in a tight channel like this. But again, unless the pullbacks are more than just a bar or two, it's usually better only to buy. However, a good limit order trader can avoid a loss if he manages his trade well. Even selling at the high of this bar, so you sell here, you can see it never pulled back to that price. So you're going to lose money on that trade. But if you scale in higher, maybe below this bear bar, you might be able to get up at the midpoint of your two entries and avoid a loss. Again, that's only for skilled traders. You sell here at that high and then you sell more below a bear bar on the reversal down. And then you try to exit at the midpoint between your two entries and you avoid a loss. You lose on this trade, you win on this trade and the loss is exactly equal to the win. Very often a trading range begins when the market is still in a bull channel and it's not clear yet that the trading range has begun. Here we go. A bull breakout above a bear trend and we got a pullback traders will buy the reversal up. So you take the buy signals and you can take strong sell signals, especially second entry shorts. So you buy here, you buy a pullback here, you know, really not good shorts here. The channels too tight, the pullbacks are too small, but up here you get a wedge one, two, three, a bear bar. You can sell below that bear bar or maybe below here for a second entry short, but you're not going to make much money. You're looking to scalp. You have a bull channel, which is a bull trend and you're hoping it's converting into a trading range. And in a trading range, you're not looking for a major reversal. You're looking for a minor reversal, a brief leg down, enough for a scalp. You're looking for a small, a bull flag, a good opportunity, a good reason to exit your short. So you sell here and you either get out at a fixed number of ticks or pips down or on a reversal up here from a wedge bull flag. And then when it gets very quiet like this, very tight, it's better not to trade. You stop trading. When the market's going down, also use binary decisions. Is it a bear trend or is it a bear leg in a trading range? Now, very often a bear channel spends a lot of time in a trading range. And if it is, then traders can trade in both directions, especially if the legs are big. Here, they're not all that big, so difficult to make money buying. Clearly a bear breakout, a big bear breakout, close below the low of the past 20 bars, far below the low. Chances are there'll be at least a small second leg down, possibly a spike, pullback and channel down. So when you see a strong breakout like this, you have to get short for any reason. You can sell at the market, you can sell above bars, you can sell below bars, but you need to sell at least a small position, either at the market or in a pullback. We have trend resumption down here, another bear bar closing in at slow. You can sell that. We're trying to reverse up here, pretty tight bear channel, strong bear breakout, probably at least a measured move down. So you should bet the bull reversal will fail. So you sell above bars. And then here you got follow through bars, you can sell closes. Here you got a double top, this bull bar, that bull bar, you can sell the reversal down. Here you got a small double top, you sell the reversal down. You can call it a triangle. We went up and then down, up, down, up, and you sell the reversal down. If the stop is far, for example, if you sell here, the stop is pretty far. You have to trade small. And if you cannot trade small enough, do not take the trade. You only trade if you can manage it correctly. And an important part of managing correctly is using an appropriate stop. Spike, pullback, and then it looks like we're channeling down here. Different ways to draw channels. Channels tend to become flatter as they mature. In general, when the channel is pretty tight, and this one is pretty tight, it's better only to sell. So you can sell maybe a 50% pullback of the last bare leg. Here's a pullback. Here's another bare leg. So sell somewhere in the middle of that bare leg or on a resumption down. And can bulls buy? They can see if a trader bought that low, it went up a little bit, maybe not enough for a scalp. But because it went back above the breakout point and did not form a gap, traders will buy the breakout below this low. So they'll place a limit order at this low, get filled here, and then try to make a scalp up there. A bare channel, especially a tight bare channel, it's a trend. So it's better to swing at least part of your short positions. And again, you're short for any reason. You short bare closes. You short attempts to reverse up. You sell below bars as the trend is resuming down. There are many opportunities to sell all through here. You're obviously not going to take any of them. But the point I'm making is you can enter on almost any bar. If you know what the market is trying to do and you're flat, you need to get short. And there are many ways to do it. Can you buy an a bare channel? Well, only if the bounces up are big enough for at least a scalp. If they're not, if the channel is pretty tight like this, usually better only to sell. It's a bare channel, so it's a bare trend. It's easier to make money selling. However, traders can buy, but there are several things you have to have in your favor to do that. First of all, you need pullbacks to go above breakout points. This pullback went above that breakout point. Next, you want the pullbacks to go up high enough so that there's room for a scalp. And finally, it's better to only do it if you're a very experienced and consistently profitable trader, because it's too difficult to make money buying in a bare trend. Now, I said you need overlap. You need a stairs pattern. You need pullbacks to go above breakout points. If you are buying in a bare channel, the very first buy you should take should only be a limit order buy, buying at the low of the prior low or buying below that low. Again, you should only do it if you're an expert. You place a limit order to buy at this low, you get filled here. You place a limit order to buy at this low, you get filled there. Once the swings up start becoming big, then traders could start entering with stop orders. But until you have reasonably big rallies, it's better only to enter with limit orders. And again, only a really skilled trader should do that. And he should only do it if the pullbacks are big. And this is barely big enough to do that profitably. And finally, you have to do it using the appropriate stock and trading the appropriate size. So if you do buy, let's say you buy here, it doesn't go up. You buy more here on the reversal up. There's a small bull bar here. And then you try to get out, break even on the first trade right here, and with a small profit, a scalp on the second trade. Whenever a trader is disappointed by what the market is doing, it's usually better either to try to get out, break even or with only a small profit. If the swings are big enough, you can also enter with stop orders above bull bars on the reversal up. But that's not the case here. These swings, the rallies are too small to be entering with stop orders, because you do not want to be buying too high up when the rally is not going to go much further. Trading range. This is a trading range. It's also a bare channel. And very often a bare channel is also in a trading range. If it's not clearly in a trading range, it's better only to be trading in the direction of the trend. Here we're clearly in a bare trend. We're in a trading range here as well, but very tight. A tight trading range in a bare trend, you certainly do not want to be buying yet. Better only to take the sell signals. For the bears, it's a double top bear flag. Here's the neckline. They want to break out and a measured move down. Weak rally. If you do buy here, you have to be pretty quick to get out. You cannot expect a big move up. It's a minor reversal. It's a wedge, but a very tight channel. Probably a minor reversal in a trading range. And that means you're looking for a scalp. Maybe on a reversal back down, you take your profits right here. Especially three pushes up. One, two, three. So it's a wedge bare flag. It's a double top bear flag. You know, you got to get out. And bears know that as well. They know that the bulls will give up. So what they do is they sell at the same price. When the range becomes extremely tight like this, it's better to just stop trading. You're not going to be making money when it's this tight. Bull channels. We're in a bull channel here. And then you can call it a breakout or you can call it a very tight bull channel. This is a broader bull channel. And the legs down are big enough for the bears to make money. And maybe even it became always in short here or here. You know, some traders would think so. And so you have to assume it's a broad bull channel. Here we have a breakout, not particularly strong, and then a pullback. So this is actually a very tight bull channel. A tight bull channel is a breakout on a higher timeframe. And a broad bull channel is basically a trading range that's sloped upward. In general, a broad bull channel, you get a rally and a pullback to around the midpoint. You want to be buying somewhere in the middle third of the last leg up. Another rally, buy somewhere in the middle third. Another rally, buy somewhere in the middle third or the bottom two thirds. Another rally, you want the pullback to go at least one third down. So you want to buy somewhere in the middle third, bottom third. That's the buy zone, the bottom two thirds, the bottom half of the most recent leg up. And those are the ideal locations to buy. Rally and then a pullback. You try to buy somewhere in there. Rally, a pullback. Try to buy here. You can also buy, you can buy at the bottom third. You can buy at the market. You can buy bear closes, betting that they'll fail to result in a bear trend. Or the easiest way is simply to buy a reversal up, especially above a bull bar. Bulls will also buy strong bear closes because it's a bull trend. The bulls will bet that the bear reversal attempts will fail. It's a great thing to do. Bull trend around a 50% pullback. Bear's trying to get a breakout. It's a bull trend. The bear breakouts will probably fail. Why not buy them betting that they'll fail because the probability is on your side. After each strong breakout to a new high, then you have a major high or low. Traders raise their stops. So a new high up here. Traders will raise their stops. Tight bull channel. You trade it like a breakout because it is a breakout on a higher timeframe chart. You only want to buy. You don't want to sell. And you can buy for any reason. You can buy the third or fourth consecutive bull bar. You can buy below a bar, betting the reversal attempt will close. You can buy a breakout above a small bar. Pull back and break out above a bull flag. Doesn't matter. You got to buy for any reason. Here's a bear channel. And parts of it look reasonably strong. You know, maybe some computers will see it as always in long. Whenever you have a bear channel, and at times it looks like it might also be always in long, yet it continues to form lower highs and lower lows. It's a fairly broad bear channel. However, something like this very tight. So when the market is doing this, better only to sell. But for the rest of it, you can buy or sell. The sell zone. Somewhere in the top two thirds, top half of the prior leg down. Bear breakout. Pull back to the middle third. Top two thirds. That's the sell zone. Bear breakout. Pull back somewhere to the middle of that. It's the sell zone. Bear breakout. The top two thirds you want to be selling somewhere in there. Bear breakout. Top two thirds of that breakout you want to be selling in here. Okay. Bear breakout. The top two thirds of that bear breakout. So you're looking to sell somewhere in here. Those are the sell zones. Bears are looking to sell pullbacks into the sell zone. And they'll also sell a reversal back down. So you can sell with a stop as it reverses down. Now bears believe it's a bear trend and they're correct. So they believe any attempt by the bulls to reverse it up will fail. And therefore bears will sell bull bars. Strong bull closes. Right? Strong bull close. Strong bull close. Strong bull close. The bears will bet that these strong rallies will fail to get above the top of the last major lower high. Bear breakout. New low. Reasonable strong bear breakout. If you sell at any point after this bear breakout, your stop is up here. And then you can sell at any point after this bear breakout. And then you can sell at any point after this bear breakout. New low. Reasonable strong bear breakout. New low. Reasonable strong bear breakout. If you sell at any point after this bear breakout, your stop is up here. It's a bear trend. So it's easier to make money selling. And traders should be concentrating on selling. And because it's a bear trend, you can sell either for a swing or for a scalp. You can see every new low, there's a bounce up. That tells you that bears are taking partial or full profits at new lows. And then they're selling rallies expecting another new low. Experienced traders can also buy reversals up. We've had pretty good buying pressure here. Pretty good buying pressure here. Pretty good rally here as well. So traders will buy at the prior low or on a reversal up from the prior low. In general, if you're buying in a bear trend, a bear channel, it's better only to scalp. So you buy here and you get out somewhere up in the sell zone where the bears will start to short. Look at this chart. Starts in the upper left, goes to the lower right. It's a bear channel. We've got lower highs, lower lows. But if you only look at this part of the chart, you know, 90% of the chart, it's also in our trading range. As the trend gets late, as it progresses, it tends to weaken and it eventually evolves into a trading range. And when it's in a trading range, even though it's still arguably a broad bear channel, when it's in a trading range, traders look to buy low, sell high and scalp. So we have a bear breakout. You can call it a bear channel. It evolved into a trading range. It's also a broad bear channel. And traders are looking to buy reversals up from new lows. Look to sell near the top of the range, either with limit orders or better yet on a reversal down. If a leg up is pretty strong, don't take the first sell. Look to take the second. Don't take the first. Look to take the second. Don't take the first. Look to take the second. Take the second. Whenever things are unclear, always wait for a second entry or for more clarity. And trading range, you want to be selling in the upper third and then buying in the lower third. And because it's a trading range, you do not believe it's going to go up very far. You do not believe it's going to go down very far. And therefore you scalp. Here's the upper third of the trading range. And traders will look to sell in the upper third. And they know that the probability is 60% maybe higher that the market will go down 10 ticks or 10 pips before it goes up 10 ticks or 10 pips. Does not matter what number. X number of ticks up or down. X number of pips up or down. If you're selling in the upper third of a trading range, the odds are it'll go down before it goes up the same number of ticks or pips. So the math is good for the bears. Upper third of the range, look to sell a reversal down, sell a reversal down, sell down. And the bottom third of the range, the opposite is true. Traders look to buy because they know that the probability is 60% or greater that the market is going to go up before it goes down. Up how much? Any amount. Up 10 ticks, 10 pips, 20 ticks, 20 pips before it goes down the same amount. And if you're uncertain about a reversal, wait for a second entry. Everyone knows that the market cycle means that the market alternates between trends and trading ranges. If the market's in a trend, it'll become a trading range. If it's in a trading range, it'll become a trend. And the trend could be down or the trend could be up. So traders trade it like a trading range as long as it's in a trading range. And once it clearly converts into a breakout, then they switch and begin to trade it like a new cycle. Every cycle begins with a breakout. So you go from a breakout to a channel in a trading range. I said this is also a broad bear channel. Broad bear channels are mostly trading ranges during a lot of the time when the market's in a broad bear channel. It's also in a trading range. And that's why if the market is in a broad bear channel, a lot of traders will trade in both directions. Some computers will look at this and say, it's lower highs, lower lows. It's a bear trend, a bear channel. Other computers will look at it and say, it's mostly sideways. It's a trading range. And they trade them the same. They look to sell in the upper third. They look to buy in the lower third. And then they scalp. It does not matter what you call it because you're going to be trading at the same. You're going to be buying low, selling high and scalping. BL SHS. When you look at it this way, you can see it looks more like a broad bear channel. Lower highs, lower lows, but it's still also a trading range. What happens if you miss the best signal? Well, the reality is there is no best signal and there is no perfect trade. But there are lots of good signals and you can enter on almost any bar. I made that point earlier. And that's a big fallacy that traders don't understand. Strong bull breakout. You only want to buy. But once it starts to form a trading range, you can enter on any bar and make money. If you manage your trade correctly and use an appropriate stock. So you can buy here or sell here and make money. You can buy here or sell here and make money. If you sell here, how do you make money? Well, you sell more on a rally. And then when it gets back there, you get out break even on your first entry or profit on your second entry. You can enter on almost any bar. Strong bull breakout. You only want to buy. You can buy closes. You can buy below bars. Betting the reversal will fail. You can buy above bars. Betting the trend will resume up. Pretty tight bear channel. You can sell above bars. Betting the reversal up will fail. Double top bear flag. Slightly lower high. And triangle, second entry short. You can sell with a stop on the way down. In general, if you think it might be in a trading range, it's better to be looking to buy low and then sell rallies and scalping. It doesn't matter where you begin trading in the market cycle. You can trade in the bull trend phase. You can buy for any reason at any time all the way up. And then once you start to pull back, you have to assume you're either going to be forming a bull channel or a trading range. And it doesn't matter because you trade them very similarly. You want to buy low, sell high and scalp. Every bar on every chart of every major market has big volume. And that tells you that traders institutions are buying and other institutions are selling all day long. And the difference, one of the differences between a beginner and an experienced trader is an experienced trader sees a reason to buy and a reason to sell on 90% of the bars on the chart. Like this, you only want to buy. But like this, a good trader is going to see a way to sell and a way to buy. And then he just tries to structure a trade that can be profitable either buying or selling. You have to understand where you are in the market cycle. And you have to trade appropriately, trade the appropriate size. And it's easier to make money as an experienced trader if you're also able to scale in. I want to talk now about the Trader's Equation and the 40-60 rule. It's a rule that I came up with. I have several rules like that. Now, look at this chart. Very strong breakout. Now, how many bars on this chart are in a very strong breakout? Maybe 100 bars on the chart. Here we got four or five bars in a strong breakout. In general, on any chart, only 5-10% of the bars are in a strong breakout. And when they are, you only want to be trading with the trend. 90% of the bars in the chart are either in a trading range or a channel. And that is when my 40-60 rule applies. Bulls and bears can make money taking opposite sides. And it doesn't matter which side you take. So anywhere through here, if you structure your trade correctly and manage it well, you can make money buying or selling here or here or here or here. Same with here. And it doesn't matter whether you buy or sell. And it doesn't matter which bar you choose for your entry. 90% of the bars on any chart you can buy or sell and make money if you manage your trade well. Here we have a bear trend, a very strong breakout and a high or low. You can call it a head and shoulders bottom if you want. It doesn't matter. It's a high or low major trend reversal. It's a pullback from a very strong bull breakout, around a 50% pullback. The earliest entry is buying with a stop above the high of the prior bar. The risk is small, either to this low, which is the best stop, maybe to below the low of the signal bar. Small risk, big reward, great risk reward. That always comes with low probability. Whenever you have a great risk reward for your trade, you know the probability of making money is small. If you wait to buy during the breakout, you stop as much further away. The risk is greater and there's less profit left. The reward is less. So the risk reward is worse buying during the breakout phase, but the probability of making money is much higher. And that always is the case. Whenever you have a high probability trade, the risk reward is bad. Whenever you have a low probability trade, the risk reward is good. Both are acceptable, again, if you manage them correctly. So let's say you buy this high or low major trend reversal. It's a weak buy signal bar, a doji instead of a bull bar, and it's following a pretty strong bear bar. So the probability is low. In general, whenever you're taking a low probability trade, you need to get a reward equal to at least two times your actual risk. So let's say you buy above the high of this bar. Your actual risk was just below the low of that bar. You can choose your initial risk. You can call it actual risk. It's about the same. So you buy here on this bar. Stop is here. This is one times your risk. That's two times your risk. And if you hold for a reward that is equal to two times your risk, even in a low probability trade, a 40% trade, the math is good for making money. So it is an appropriate thing to do. So let's say you can try to hold for a bigger profit. Let's say instead of taking the low risk, you can try to hold for a bigger profit. So let's say you can try to hold for a bigger profit. So let's say instead of taking the low risk, low probability trade, you wait for the strong gold breakout and you buy that close. You know the probability is high that the market's going higher, but your risk is big. However, whenever you have a high probability, you can try to hold for a bigger profit. You know, risk is big. However, whenever you have a high probability trade, you no longer have to hold for a reward that is twice as big as your risk. In fact, as long as you go for a reward equal to at least your risk, it's a profitable strategy. So if you buy here, stop down here. One default target would be one times your risk. Your actual risk is tiny. If you buy here, your actual risk was small. It's just below the low of this bar. High probability you could go for one times your actual risk, but that is not a good thing. Usually the minimum is not the best. When you see a strong breakout like this, I would look for some kind of a measured move based upon the height of this bull bar. So somewhere up here. The trader's equation says that as long as you go for a reward at least equal to one times your actual risk, the math makes sense. It's a good trade. So you buy this close. Your actual risk was to just below the low of this bar. So one times the actual risk is right here. Theoretically, you could take your profit right here. And mathematically, that would be a profitable approach to trading. But it's not a really good approach to trading because you'll probably get a measured move based upon the height of this bar. There's a 60% probability that you'll get a measured move based upon the height of this bar. So why exit right here? The minimum is rarely the best, right? To graduate from college, maybe you need a D average. Are you going to be happy getting a D average? Are you going to be happy working for the minimum wage? Right? It's an acceptable wage. It's a legal wage. But the minimum of anything is rarely the best. When you see a breakout like this, high probability of at least a measured move up. So probably a 60% chance that the market is going to go up for some kind of a measured move. Maybe based upon the initial risk. Maybe you put a stop here or you put a stop here. Or a measured move based upon the size of this body from the open of this bar to the close of that bar. So this is one times approximate initial risk if you put the stop below the bottom of that breakout bar. Buying after a strong breakout, high probability, but you pay for it with big risk. The stop is far away. Here's a pretty good bear trend. Very tight channel. Tight channel here. Let's say you sell the close here after six consecutive bear trends. All six closing below their midpoints. It's a high probability bet the market's going lower. Not necessarily all the way here, but at least somewhat lower. You know that all trends are constantly trying to reverse. But you also know that markets have inertia and they tend to continue what they've been doing. So if the market's in a trend, chances are reversal attempts will fail and the trend will resume. Every one of these reversals is minor and it can be hard to hold short. You sell here and you see the market constantly trying to reverse, but you should hold short. And if you're not short, you can sell above every reversal bar betting that the reversal will fail. Bet that it will be minor. A minor reversal. You got a tight bear channel trying to reverse. A minor reversal means that it's either going to be a bull leg in a trading range or a bull leg in what turns out to be a bear flag. You have to learn to rely on your stop. And if you sell here or anywhere here, your stop is up here. In general, when you have a reasonably strong trend, it's better if you can swing. Most traders should only swing. Experienced traders will often scalp and take a profit, scalp and take a profit, scalp and take a profit. But a lot of traders, especially beginners, will not get back in and they'll end up missing the trade. So don't scalp when you should swing. The math is good for scalping. But the problem is you do not sell again and you end up missing 80% of the trend. You only scalp in a strong trend if you're able to sell again. Now I'm going to talk a little bit about default targets. When you cannot decide where to get out, there are some basic rules that I use. Let's say you sold right here. Your stop is above there. That's your initial risk. The height of that red rectangle. And there are lots of ways to take profits. And none of them is perfect. But it's good to have a default plan. A basic plan that you use whenever you're not sure what to do. And you can change the targets based upon support and resistance or the momentum that the market has. Most traders are not particularly good about determining probability. As I said, 90% of the bars on the chart, the probability is between 40 and 60% that you'll make a profitable trade. Or that the market will continue or go the direction that you expect it to go before it hits your stock. Let's say you sell here. Your initial risk is there. If you cannot decide where you should take profits, a good default is always two times your initial risk. There's your initial risk. Here's one times. Here's two times. So that's a reasonable location to take profits. So on any trade, if you cannot decide where you should be taking profits, it's always good to take at least partial profits at two times your initial risk. And I say always because let's say you're taking a trade that turns out to be a low probability trade and you were not sure that it was low probability when you entered the trade. Low probability is 40%. The math, the trader's equation math is always good if you're going for a reward equal to two times actual risk. Initial risk is always greater than actual risk. If your default plan is to go for a profit that is two times initial risk, the math is always going to be good. Here's three times initial risk. So a reasonable approach is to take half off at two times your initial risk and then take another half off or 25% more off at three times initial risk. And then let's say you take a quarter off here and then you just swing the balance and you rely on your protective stop. After every strong breakout to a new low, you have a new major lower high. So you lower your stop to just above that new lower high. So at the end of the session, you look for any reason to exit. For example, a new low reversal up, reversal up here. Pretty good bull trend. We have an attempt at a double bottom. We've got a bear breakout and then a pretty good reversal up. And pretty strong soft, pretty strong reversal up. So lower low, major trend reversal. Bear trend, bull breakout, lower low. So you can buy a reversal up above here, above here. You can buy a strong bull close there. Lower low, major trend reversal. Higher low, major trend reversal. Maybe not major, you know, not all that many bars, but it's a reasonable buy. I think the market went always in long on this reversal up. Strong breakout, three consecutive bull bars closing near their highs. Over here, right here. One, two, three. So you can buy closes. And let's say you buy this close. Your stop is going to be below the most recent major higher low. And that's this major because it went to a new high. And it's a strong leg up. If you buy here, your stop is here. And what's your default whenever you're not sure what to do? Well, in general, two times your risk. Two times your actual risk. But a lot of traders will go two times your initial risk. You buy here, stop down here. Two times your risk is up there. Let's say instead you bought here. Your initial risk is below the lowest bar. Let's look at that. You buy here. This is one times your risk. So you buy here, your risk is here. This is one times. That's two times. And you can see that traders who did buy here, a lot of them did exit at two times the initial risk because we got a pullback at that price. You can also exit on a reversal down. Arguing it's a type of a wedge. One, two, three, four. Or one, two, three. In any case, it's the top of a bull channel. Traders will either take profits with a limit order at two times their initial risk or on a reversal down below a bear bar. Can you sell this? Well, you got a bear bar, but it has a tail below. And this channel is pretty tight. Even though it's a wedge or type of a wedge, it's a minor reversal. And probably the best you get is a trading range. And the trading range could have a couple of legs down or it could simply be sideways as it was here. Another wedge, one, two, three. But again, a very tight channel. You could take profits there if you want, but I would not be selling there because the pullbacks are too small and the channel is too tight. The market's still always in long, even with this reversal. So traders will buy a reversal up. They'll buy a reversal up. They'll buy a reversal up. Still always in long. So traders will still buy reversals up. There are entries all during the day on any timeframe. There are entries on every bar. There's big volume on every bar. So you can enter at any time. And one of the purposes of this course is to teach you ways to enter. You don't have to wait for perfect setups. You're never going to find them. It's okay to wait until the market is clearly always in long or clearly always in short and then trade in the direction of the trend. So a strong bull breakout after a lower low, major trend reversal, pretty strong reversal. So the market's always in long. It's probably going higher. So you can buy for any reason. For example, you can buy that close. Three consecutive bull bars to the bars are getting bigger, closing on its high, closing on its high, closing on the high of maybe 20 bars or so. And look what followed. We have a series of additional trend bars. And now we have seven bars up without a pullback. So a seven bar bull micro channel. That's a strong bull trend. We're probably going higher even if we pull back. Again, you can buy closes. You can buy closes. This is a buy the close bull trend. You can buy that close. Because the market's clearly always in long. And even if there is a pullback, the odds are high. Bulls will buy it and will go higher. Whenever you buy, it doesn't matter if you buy here or here or here. The initial stop is down here. You could put it here once you see this breakout. If you do have it here, if you stop is further away, I think you could put it here if you bought here or here. You have to trade small. If you stop as far away, you always have to trade small. Now some traders, they'll buy and they'll scalp and buy again and scalp and buy again. Some traders will buy and take partial profits and then add another signal, another buy the close bar. They'll put their full position back on. Trend resuming up. Buy the close, buy the close, buy the close. Or buy above any of these bars. Buy below any of these bars. Arguing that this is strong enough so that there should be at least a small leg up. Strong breakout to a new high and therefore this is a major higher low. At this point, traders will raise their stock to below this low. After each new major higher low, you raise the stock. So the bottom of each new strong leg up, raise the stock because at that point, this higher low becomes a major higher low. And if it's a bull trend, it should not pull back below the low of that major higher low. If it does, your premise of a bull trend is wrong. The market at that point would then either be in a bear trend or simply in a trading range. Another breakout, six or seven bars up. This is not clearly a major higher low, but a lot of traders after six or seven bars up will trail their stop to below that low. Stronger breakout pair of good bull bars, new high. So another major higher low. Traders will raise their stop again. In this video, I talked about the market cycle and the things that it can do. Every chart can either be in a trend or a trading range. If it's in a trend, it can be a breakout. You only want to trade in the direction of the trend. Or it can be in a channel. If the channel is tight, only trade in the direction of the trend. If the channel is broad, it's good to trade in the direction of the trend. But you can also make money scalping in the opposite direction. And then eventually the channel evolves into a trading range. And there traders should look to buy low, sell high, and scalp. I talked about the trader's equation and how you only want to take a trade if you can structure a trade with a positive trader's equation. You want the probability of profit times the size of the profit to be significantly greater than the probability of loss times the size of the loss. I also talked some about the 40-60 rule. 10% of the bars in the chart are in a strong breakout. You only trade in the direction of the trend. 90% of the bars in the chart are either in a broader channel or in a trading range. In which case, the probability of making money is between 40 and 60%. So let's say your stop is 10 units, 10 pips, 10 ticks below. If you go for a reward that is twice that, you have a positive trader's equation because the probability is at least 40%. And anytime you hold for a reward equal to twice your risk, you're going to have a positive trader's equation. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video is the second of two videos on how to trade.