 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. In this video, I'm going to be talking about program trading. First, I'm going to talk about what exactly program trading is. Next, I'll talk about high frequency trading. Then I'll talk about spoofing, which is now illegal. And finally, I'll talk about front running and high frequency trading firms. Front running is also illegal. Program trading simply means that institutions are using a software program that they wrote to trade automatically. It's automated trading. And the software logic is called an algorithm. And algorithms are based upon every imaginable concept. Even in quiet trading range, when it appears that nothing is happening, algorithms are still buying and other algorithms are still selling because there's an opportunity to make money. It may be difficult for you or me to make money when the trading range is very tight, but high frequency trading firms can make money. There are countless firms buying and countless firms selling in every bar during the chart. Traders always wondering about a perfect entry, a perfect setup. But the reality is there are no perfect setups. And if you look at every bar in the chart, there's a lot of volume. And that's because the institutions see reasons to buy and reasons to sell at every second during every day. The institutional bearish programs are fighting constantly to create a downside breakout. And the institutional bullish programs are constantly fighting to create a bullish breakout. Eventually, one side wins and the other one covers. So the bulls get their breakout. The bulls buy more. The bears buy to cover their shorts. In this case, the bears got a bearish breakout. The bears sell more as it goes down. And the bulls who were buying now have to sell out of their losing lungs. The bulls give up. The bears keep selling. And then with a bull breakout, the bulls keep buying and the bears give up. Here are two charts. I want you to take a look at them. And you'll see they're very similar. One is the SPY, the SPY, which is an ETF, an exchange traded fund created to mimic the price of the S&P 500. And so is the E-mini. The E-mini also tracks the S&P 500. So these two charts are very closely related. Some firms specialize in arbitrage trading. And what they're doing is looking at two related markets to see if one of them is not synchronized accurately or closely enough with the other. And throughout the day, there are tiny discrepancies between related markets. I'm showing these two, SPY and E-mini. But other related markets are the NASDAQ or just about most major stocks. The Dow Jones index. There are all kinds of related markets. And the arbitrage firms have algorithms, computer programs, that know exactly what the price of one will be when they see the price of the other. And if the price is not where it's supposed to be, let's say it's too high, they'll then sell the high one and buy the low one, hoping that and expecting that the two will get back in line. So they're looking to make tiny profits and they do it all day long. And that is why related markets have charts that are almost identical like this, because the arbitrage firms are constantly looking for tiny discrepancies between related markets and then they fade them. So if the SPY is a little too high relative to the E-mini, they buy more E-mini and they sell SPY until the prices are the same and then they take their profits. This is an important component of the total volume of every day. Some estimates say that 30% of all trading volume is arbitrage trading. You can also arbitrage the E-mini with a portfolio of stocks. The computers might have designed a portfolio that they intend to have tracked the S&P. And if it's out of whack, if it's not synchronized the way it should be, let's say the stocks are getting too expensive relative to the S&P, they might sell stocks and buy the E-mini until it's back in line. All day long, they're looking for tiny discrepancies between related markets. And that's what keeps markets close to a fair value. High frequency trading firms also monitor related markets for little discrepancies and they as well trade arbitrage looking to make small, quick profits. All the institutions run programs. They all have automated trading. Many of them also have discretionary trading where traders sit in front of a screen the way I sit in front of a screen and place trades. But most of the volume that we see traded every day in the E-mini is traded by programs. And those trades, everybody's trades creates price action and everyone can see it. And if you learn how to read the charts, you can piggyback onto their trades. But it's really important to learn how to manage your trades closely. So for example, when I see this, I know there are a lot of buy programs working right now and the market's probably going to go higher. What am I going to do? I'm going to buy, right? And one easy way to do it is wait for the bar to close. And if it closes near as high, you buy the close. Even buying here is okay because the odds are the first reversal down will be bought. And worst case scenario, you get out break even. Most traders, not most, but a lot of traders who buy the close in a situation like this, don't buy a full position. They buy small enough so that they can buy more if the market goes against them. And then when it gets back to their first price, they can get out break even on their first entry and then with a profit on their lower entry. So you bought the close and you bought more on this close. And then you see this, this bear bar after right after you bought the close. Are you feeling happy or you're disappointed? You're clearly disappointed. You're disappointed by the follow through. And because you're disappointed, you might start selling every time it gets back to the original entry price. And that's what's taking place here. Instead of the market continuing up, bulls keep selling out of their lungs. So they sell here, they sell here, they sell here. And at some point they might give up completely. And then you get a reversal down like this. And this represents the final bulls. The bulls who did not take these opportunities to sell. They're finally giving up after they see the market repeatedly try to go up and fail. The bulls give up here. The bears see it as well. And they're selling at the same time that the bulls are selling. So the bears say, ah, the bulls are going to be disappointed. They're going to try to get out break even. And they're going to sell exactly where they're trying to get out. If it goes up there again, I'll sell again. If it goes up there again, I'll sell again. And if it starts to go down, I'll sell even more. Trying to force all the remaining bulls out. So you get a give up situation like this, a bear breakout. So what's your relationship? Traders, when they start out sometimes, think that maybe their trade will move the market. And the reality is, you cannot move the market. Maybe if you're trading some tiny stock. But if you're trading a major market like the e-mini. You do not have enough money and every person you've ever met in your life does not have enough money. If all of you got together, you could not move the market even one little tick. If you want to sell at a certain price, you cannot sell unless one or more institutions wants to buy at that price. And if you want to buy at a certain price, you cannot buy unless one or more institutions is willing to sell at your price. If you're trying to get stopped out of a bad trade, the market cannot get to your price unless one or more institutions wants it to get to that price. You will not get stopped out unless one or more institutions get stopped out as well. That's not absolutely true, right? But it's true 99 plus percent of the time that you cannot move the market. The market will only go to a certain price if institutions make a go there. Remember I said bulls will buy closes and then they get disappointed by this. And the bulls finally decide to sell at break even. They finally give up. The bulls have bought here. And look at this bar. This bar. Let's say the bulls kept waiting, waiting, waiting. I'm not going to give up. I'm not going to give up. I'm not going to give up. And then look at this bar. It had to go above the high. It had to go above the close here if they bought this close. It had to go above that close for them to get out and break even. If at the end of this bar they decide, okay, I'm going to get out break even. I'm going to place a limit order to get out at the same price where I bought. So they placed a limit order to get out there. But this bar did not get above that limit order. And why did it not get above that limit order? Because too many institutions wanted to sell lower. Too many institutions wanted to sell at that price or below that price. And if you were a bull who bought here or bought for any reason, a high one buy, a high two buy, and you see this reversal, you've got to get out. And these two bars are give up bars. The bulls are giving up. Now, I said a moment ago, you cannot move the market. If you want to buy at a certain price, whether to get long or to get stopped out of a bad short, the market will not get to your price unless one or more institutions wants to buy at that same price. This is definitely true in major markets like the E-mini. At every given price, there are hundreds, sometimes thousands of orders from institutions at the market. One tick above the market, one tick below the market. And if you're trading one lot, 10 lot, or 100 lots, 100 contracts, you're not going to move the market because there are thousands of contracts who want to do the opposite. So you don't have to worry that, oh, my gosh, if I buy 10 contracts, the market's going to go up and I'll get trapped and the market will go down. If you trade 10 contracts, the market doesn't care. You're totally nothing as far as the market is concerned. Okay. So here we have a rally, five consecutive bull trend bars, all closing near their highs. Three of them are pretty good-sized bars. Chances are the first reversal down will be bought. Let's say you don't like entering with limit orders. Let's say you don't like buying at the market or buying the low of this bar, and you only want to buy with stops. Well, you might buy with a stop just above the high of this pullback bar. If you got filled just above the high of this bar, you got filled over here. It only got there because other institutions wanted to buy at the same price. That's not 100% true, but it's 99% true. You should always assume that if you buy, the only reason you were able to buy is because there were other institutions. There were institutions that wanted to buy exactly at that price. Okay. Every now and then on the news, you'll hear about some big cheater getting arrested and tried and convicted. And that obviously creates the question, can firms cheat? Can they steal my money? The United States markets, all of the United States major markets, the stock markets, the bond markets, forex markets, everything is closely regulated. And it's not a problem. Even though you occasionally hear about big insider trading cases or spoofing cases or market manipulation cases, it has nothing to do with you and me, and it's not going to cost you any money. All of the common ways that firms used to cheat are illegal. Insider trading. Front-running orders. You place an order. The firm sees your order. They do not put your order in the market. They place one right before yours, and then the market goes, let's say you want to buy it, the market goes up, and then they fill your order at a higher price. That's all illegal. Spoofing. Putting orders in the market to trick people into thinking that you seriously want the order to get filled, and right before it gets filled, you pull the order. Collusion with others to corner the market. Getting a group of traders together to move the market in one direction, and then once it gets far enough, they do the opposite. And then in the forex market, the price gets set every day at 4 o'clock. It's called the 4 p.m. London fix, and trying to cheat there, trying to artificially move the market one way or the other up or down, that is also illegal. HFT, high-frequency trading. There are books about it. There are movies about it. It's been on 60 minutes, and it's a type of program trading. In fact, most of the volume every day in a major market like the E-mini and most of the stocks is created by high-frequency trading firms. They scalp for tiny profits, and they have a minimum effect on the overall direction of the market. The firms are simply looking to make one tick up or one tick down, and then they get up, and then they look for the next trade. It's all totally automated, and it's all statistically created. There was a book about it called Flash Boys, and then a movie about it, but it has nothing to do with traders. I remember when the movie came out and the book came out, Michael Lewis was on a lot of talk shows, and he made it sound like it's costing all of us money, but it's really foolish to say that because it really has nothing to do with traders. Flash money, Flash Boys, and high-frequency trading firms, they're trading in milliseconds, in fractions of like a tick or piece of a tick, and that's not our time frame. We operate in minutes or hours, not in milliseconds. So anything that they do that takes place in a millisecond is not going to cost us any money. It's only relevant to high-frequency trading firms. But he sold the book, he made millions of dollars to get a movie, and it makes a good story. It does not affect us. Whenever you hear about Flash Boys and Michael Lewis, go see the movie. It's fun, but it has nothing to do with you or me as a trader. There really is no typical high-frequency trading firm, but this is a fairly common approximation of what a high-frequency trading firm might do. They might make millions of trades a day, even 50 million trades a day, and they may trade 100 to 300 shares per trade, and they may be trading a basket of 1,000 stocks or 5,000 stocks. And here's a percentage of asset classes traded by prop firms, high-frequency trading prop firms, mostly stocks, but Forex markets will become increasingly important as time goes on. They don't have to be right 60 or 70 or 80% of the time. A casino does not have to win 60 or 70 or 80% of the time, right? A casino only has to win 52, 53% of the time to make a lot of money. High-frequency trading firms only have to be right about 55% of the time to make a lot of money. As long as the risk versus the reward is good, they're not risking too much for the reward that they're getting, they can make money by being right only 55% of the time. And a lot of times, they're trading for one tick or one penny, but if they do it 50 million times a day, it adds up. In the e-mini or the stock markets, they might contribute 70% of the day's volume. And other institutions create about 25% of the volume, and you and I make up the final 5%. And I'm not even certain that we make up 5%. It'll probably get less as time goes on. Now, the flash crash back in 2010. This got a lot of attention, and the market fell about 100 points, 99 points, or 10% in just a matter of minutes. In fact, at the end here, it fell 60 points, 6% in 10 minutes, and then it rallied back 66 points. So that was a crash. The market fell a lot, about 10% in a short period of time in one day. And there's been some analysis of that particular day, and what they discovered were that 15 firms, only 15 high-frequency trading firms, that's all it took, they traded 34% of the volume, they traded 33% of all trades, and they averaged about 32,000 trades that day. What's really interesting and really important is this. They traded 6 contracts on average per trade. So high-frequency trading firms, you think, oh, they're big boys on Wall Street, they're trading hundreds of e-mini contracts at a time. No, they're not. They're trading 2, 3, 5, 10. On the flash crash day, they averaged 6. When they're trading stocks, are they buying 1,000 shares of Bank of America, Apple? No, they're trading 100 shares, 200 shares, 400 shares, 500 shares, but they're doing it millions of times a day. On that same day, the flash crash day, individual traders made up only 1% of the day's volume and only 2% of the trades, and the average trader only took one trade that day, and the average size trade was only one contract. So are we important? No. Compare that to just 15 high-frequency trading firms. There are probably 200 major firms trading every day on Wall Street. 15 of the firms had a third of all trades on the flash crash day, and we, individual traders, only made up 1% of the volume. The market is controlled by institutions, and most of the volume is coming from high-frequency trading. Next, I want to talk a little bit about spoofing. Spoofing makes looking at volume pretty much useless. Firms are not stupid. If you're a firm, you know that other firms are out there using volume to make decisions on trades, and that creates an opportunity to spoof them, to fool them, to trick them. So you create fake orders to trick other firms into doing something that their algorithms want them to do. You know what an algorithm might be doing at another firm. You don't know that firm XYZ down the street has a particular algorithm, but you know that there is some firm out there who will run different algorithms, and you design algorithms designed to counteract them, and you're trying to trick them into making bad trades. There are lots of variations on it, and they are all illegal. However, I'm sure that there are variations of it going on all the time. However, it does not have any significant effect on you and me. Here's an example. Here's the current price. Let's say this is the current price. So ignore all this stuff to the right. This instant, let's say a spoofing firm wanted to buy the E-mini, but wanted to buy it at a lower price. He could place a huge sell order just above, but with no intention of getting it filled. Traders who look at volume will say, wow, look at that huge sell order just above the price right here. If you see a huge order to sell right above the current price, do you think the market's going to go up, or do you think that huge volume order is going to push the market down? So let's say the market's right here, and the spoofing firm places an order to sell 500 E-mini contracts five ticks higher, or 1,000 E-mini contracts five ticks higher, but he has no intention of having the order get filled. Other firms see this order to sell 500 E-mini contracts, and they say, wow, there's some big firm who really wants to sell 500 E-mini contracts just a little bit higher. That means that smart big money firm believes the market's going down. You see that and you say, oh, I better start selling. You're being spoofed. As the market's going up, you start to sell because you see this huge sell order just above, and that means some huge institution believes the market's going down. And as the market starts to go down, guess what? The spoofer who had that order cancels his order, and then he buys at the same time. So the order disappears. The yellow order up there disappears. And as the market's falling from these firms selling, the spoofer gets to buy lower than the price was when he put on the spoof over here. Because he put on that fake order up here to sell, other firms said, oh, it's going down. I better sell here. So these firms sold here, and it allowed the spoofing firm to buy below what was the current price. So he gets to buy at a discount. And if you're one of those red firms who saw the spoofing order, not knowing it was spoofing, thinking it was real, and you see the order disappear, you're going to say, gosh, we've been spoofed. We've been tricked. You sold up here, and the big order disappeared, and you realize that you've been tricked. So now you're short, and you've got to buy back your shorts. Those firms are buying. You're buying. You, the spoofing firm, is buying. The market's going to go up, and it allows the spoofing firm to make money. This supposedly was the method used by Paul Rotter, who traded German bonds. He also traded forex contracts, and he got the nickname of the flipper. And for a while there, he was making supposedly $60 million a year doing this. So you have firms who sold here. If they did not get out anywhere through here, they finally give up here, and the market goes down. And the spoofing firm who bought here is going to sell out somewhere up here. So the spoofer buys here. The market was here when you put on the spoof. Other firms sold heavily, drove the market down. The spoofer got to buy at a discount, and he was looking for a scalp. And when the market rallies, he gets to exit with a profit. The final thing I want to talk about is front running. Front running is illegal. The firm takes your order to buy. And remember, they have computers, and the computers are very fast. If the firm sees a lot of stop orders just above your order, it buys just before you. And then as soon as it buys, the market goes up. It immediately sells to you. It's selling to you after the market has gone up a little bit. So they're front running your order. So you place an order to buy. The firm receives lots of other orders to buy at a higher price, maybe on stops. The firm knows that, or their computers know that. And the instant that it receives your order, instead of placing your order in the market, it buys for itself. And the market starts to race up quickly, and then your order gets filled up here, and the firm pockets that profit. It might be a penny. It might be two cents. But if they do it many, many times a day, you're getting robbed a penny at a time. No big deal. But if they do it thousands or millions of times a day, they can make a lot of money. It sounds absurd. It sounds like it's impossible. But front running used to be a very popular approach, you know, 50 years ago, 100 years ago. And then when the computers came out, it was also popular for a while. But it is now illegal. If a firm makes, let's say, a half a penny on 100 shares, then he's making 50 cents per trade. And you say, well, that's not much money. You can't even buy coffee for that. But if he does it 10,000 times a day on all kinds of different markets, that adds up to a million dollars a year in extra profit. So it's significant for the firm. It may not be significant for you, but it is very significant for the firm. And a bigger firm could make two, three, four million dollars extra profit a year. High-frequency trading firms, they use really fast computers. This is not an exaggeration. This is what their setup might look like. They pay incredible rent to be as close to the exchanges and the nodes, the internet nodes as possible in New York City. Because the closer they are, the less time it takes to get trades filled and to get the latest trade data from the exchanges. And it's important to them to get even two, three, four milliseconds faster time. So they try to get as close as they possibly can. And they also buy the most expensive, the fastest computers that they possibly can buy. And a lot of their trades, they only hold for a microsecond, a tiny piece of a second. And a lot of their trades take place before a price change even appears on your computer. You see a price on your chart. It's not instantaneous with what took place on the exchange. It takes time to go up to the satellite to get sent over to your broker and then broker to the satellite again and then down to your house or any way you do it. There are many steps in the way. And it takes fractions of a second to see a trade on your computer that took place a fraction of a second ago. And those firms are located right next to the exchange. And most of their trades take place before it even registers on your computer. So they're in and they're out before a trade even takes place on your computer. Now, are they taking money from the little guy? Is the market really that unfair? Remember, you and I and all of our friends are only about 5% of the market. So if you're an institution, are you going to look at us and say, wow, we're going to make all of our money off those 5% of the market, those little guys? No, we're tiny pieces of pie and that's not enough to feed all of those firms. They don't care about us. They cannot possibly make enough money from us. They have to make money from one another. Remember, they are 95% of the market. And to say that, oh, they're out to get the little guy, they don't care about the little guy. You know, it's just an excuse for failing to spend the time necessary to learn how to trade. By the way, it does take a long time to learn how to trade. So all of those ads you see on the internet about making money after the first week or learning just a handful of patterns or taking a course that is an hour long, to me, I don't think that's possible. The people who make money spend hundreds of hours studying. They go through a course like this. They take lots of notes. Every day they take notes on what they're doing and they study very, very carefully. Now back to a high-frequency trading firm. How much profit? Okay, let's say the firm took 10 million trades today and each was for only 100 shares. Remember I said they trade small, but they trade often. They might trade 100 shares, 200 shares. 10 million trades today, and let's say they won 55% of the time. So 55% of 10 million trades means they won on 5.5 million trades. So they made a penny on 5.5 million trades and they lost a penny on the other 4.5 million trades. So they won 55% of the time. So they won 5.5 million times today. And they lost 45% of the time. They lost 4.5 million times today. So they made 5.5 million dollars and they lost 4.5 million dollars. So they ended up netting a million dollars. But there are 200 trading days approximately a year. So if they're consistently good, guess what? Trading 100 contracts or 100 shares or 100 anything, very tiny position, but you do it often enough and you win consistently, it can add up to a huge profit. A really good high-frequency trading firm can make hundreds of millions of dollars a year. Because some high-frequency trading firms make huge profits, lots of other firms say, hey, that guy down the street's doing it. I bet I can do it. I'm going to hire some smart programmers and I'll set up a firm and I'll start making 200 million dollars a year. Well, the reality is, just like in anything else, only the very best make the biggest dollars. So only the very best high-frequency trading firms make hundreds of millions of dollars. And many other high-frequency trading firms actually lose money. Now, high-frequency trading firms, it's easy to listen to Michael Lewis and feel like they're taking all your money and that's the reason why you're not making money. They are not the problem. If you're not making money, they are not the problem. You are the problem. Everybody likes to blame their losses on somebody else, but if you lose, it's because you're not yet good enough. You've got to put the time in to study. You've got to spend a lot of time studying. The dollars are there. There are lots of dollars there, but you have to learn how to trade and it takes a lot of time. In this video, I talked about what program trading is. I talked about high-frequency trading. I then talked about spoofing, which is illegal. And then I talked about front-running, which is illegal. And I talked about high-frequency trading firms. This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This video was on program trading. said, We got started. Don't you also have to worry about this challenge? It should be on top-building. It has to be on top-building with waiting like a plan to bring a country.