 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Training Course. This is the fifth of seven videos on breakouts. When there is a big breakout late in a trend, it typically results in either an exhaustion move, in other words the end of the move, or a measuring gap, the midpoint of a move. Next, I'll talk about how weaker breakouts typically have deeper pullbacks, and an increased chance of a channel or a trading range. I talked about big trend bars and breakouts, and sometimes they can lead to a measured move up, a big continuation of the trend. Other times, they can be a sign of an exhausted trend, and they could lead to a reversal. So, is a big trend bar an exhaustion gap or a measuring gap? Here, we're either in a trading range or bull trend, and then we see this. A very big bear trend bar closing on its low, closing below the low of the past 10 bars or so. Is this more likely exhausted bears who are tired from selling, or is it the start of a bear trend, and more likely a measuring gap? A gap between this close that low. A gap between this close that low. A gap between this close that low. A gap between this close that low. A gap between this close that low. A gap between this close that low. A gap between this close that low. A gap between this close that low. A gap between this close that low. It's a strong breakout. The context is good. We have trapped bulls who thought we were going to get a successful bull breakout. And we have a very strong reversal. Three consecutive bear bars closing on their lows or near their lows. And now we have an even bigger bear bar closing below the lows of all of these bars. Chances are, bulls are trapped into a losing trade, and many bears have not sold yet, and they're trapped out. The odds are, this gap is going to lead to a measured move down. Maybe from the height of the biclimax to the bottom of the biclimax, and then a measured move down. This big bear trend bar is a sign that the bulls are giving up. It's a give up bar. And it's a strong bear breakout. It's probably a measuring gap. The top of the biclimax, the bottom of the biclimax. The bulls are hoping for a double bottom. Even though there's no obvious attempt at a double bottom, whenever I see a strong bull breakout, and then a reversal below the low of that bull breakout, I think of it as a failed double bottom. And if it broke above the neckline, let's say we bounced here and formed a double bottom. This would be the neckline. Traders would look for a measured move up. And if instead it breaks below the bottom of the double bottom, traders will look for a measured move down, which is what we got. This is early in a trend. Suppose you get a strong breakout late in a trend. Well, the chance becomes greater that the big breakout is a climax, and that it will lead to the end of the trend or even a reversal. Here, we got a big bull trend bar. We don't know how late in the trend it is, but it's certainly about 7 or 8 bars in the trend. If it was 20 or 30 bars in the trend, and you see the strongest bull bar, the biggest bull body, coming late in the trend, it's usually more likely an exhaustion gap. A gap between the close of this bar, the close of this bar, and the swing high over here. That gap will probably close, which it did right here. The low of this bar closed the gap above this bar. The low of this bar fell below this high, and it closed that gap as well. It's therefore an exhaustion gap. Exhaustion gaps mean that the bulls are tired. They're exhausted. That doesn't mean the market will turn into a bear trend. In fact, most of the time when you have an exhaustion gap, the market goes sideways. But if the context is good, and if you start to get consecutive big bear bars, the odds are you're going to get a reversal and not simply a pause in the bull trend. Look at this bar. What do you see? The biggest bull bar occurring 20 or more bars into a bull trend. Whenever that's the case, you have to be wondering, is this more likely the start of a new leg up, or more likely an exhaustive end of the bull trend? An exhaustion gap. Whenever I see the biggest bull trend bar coming 20 or more bars into a bull trend, I believe it's more likely an exhaustive move instead of an acceleration into a new, even stronger bull trend. At this point, you're wondering, okay, this low did not fall below that high, so maybe it is a measuring gap. Maybe we get a measured move up from this low to this high, which is the bottom of this gap. Or is it more likely big bull breakout and then bear reversal bar, increasing the chances that it's an exhaustion gap? When I see this, as soon as I see a big bull bar late in a bull trend, I assume the odds are it's an exhaustion gap, a bi-climax. And then if I see it followed by a big bear bar closing on its low, the odds are high, 60% or more, that the gap will close. That will fall below the high of the prior bars and close the gap. Here we have an attempt to reverse up into a bull trend. And then we have an attempt to resume the bear trend down. It's a big bear bar closing on its low. Is it more likely an exhaustive end of this sell-off or is it more likely a break up below a double top leading to a measured move down? Look at the next bar. A bull bar closing on its high. Terrible follow through. At this point, you've got to be thinking, ah, we've got a bear trend, a strong bull breakout, and a pullback that's reversing back up. This is probably a higher low major trend reversal. We have a double bottom bull flag, broke to the downside, reversed up. Probably a failed wedge bottom. First leg down, second leg down, third leg down. Whenever you have a double bottom that breaks to the downside and then reverses up, it's effectively a type of wedge. So that also is in favor of the bulls. This big bear trend bar closing on its low and below the low of this group of seven or eight or ten bars, probably an exhaustion gap, probably a failed bear breakout. Here we're in a broad bull channel. We have a high, higher low, higher highs, higher lows. And now the trend is accelerating upward. We have three consecutive bull trend bars. The strongest series of bull trend bars occurring maybe 40 or 50 bars into the trend. Yet, look to the left. We're still not above all of the bars. So you have to be thinking that this is possibly a second leg trap. A strong bull trend occurring as a second leg. First leg up is a weak bull channel, a broad bull channel with lots of two-sided trading. And now we're accelerating upward. And we have the strongest series of three bull trend bars. And we have the biggest bull trend bar occurring more than 20 bars into a trend. And you look to the left. We're not above anything. We're still in the trading range. This is more likely going to be an exhaustive end of this trend than the start of an even stronger bull trend. So it's more likely an exhaustive by climax than it is a measuring gap. Here we have a micro double top. The bulls tried to reverse up. Does this look like a strong reversal up? No. Where are the consecutive big bull trend bars closing on their highs? This looks like a bull leg in a trading range. And now we have a double top. It's still bullish at this point. Probably we're going to try to go higher. But once you see this, this big bear bar is reversing that big bull bar. We have a reversal up, down. This is probably going to end up as an exhaustion gap. And this is a sign of bulls giving up. We're probably going to get at least a second leg down. That second leg will probably close the gap. Then this becomes an exhaustion gap. And maybe the entire three bull bars becomes an exhaustion gap. Here we have a trend up and then a trend down. And every trend bar is a breakout. Here we have a breakout and it led to higher prices. Here we have a bear breakout and we got lower prices. Bull breakout, higher prices. This is looking pretty good for the bears. We have a bear bar closing on its low. And we have a second bear bar closing on its low. This looks like decent follow through and possibly a measuring gap. The high of this bar did not get above the low of that bar. And therefore this is potentially a measuring gap. But then the next bar, bull bar closing on its high, and then we close the gap. By this bar going above that low, we've closed the gap. And this is therefore a failed bear breakout and an exhaustion gap. Here, the biggest bull trend bar, more than 20 bars into a bull trend. Is it more likely the start of an even stronger bull trend? Or is it more likely an exhaustion gap? At this point, we pulled back for a couple of bear bars and got a good bull reversal bar. We still have an open gap between this low and this high. So this still could be a measuring gap. Even though we fell below these highs, we still held above this high. So it's still a possible measuring gap. However, whenever I see the biggest bull trend bar occurring 20 or more bars into a bull trend, the odds are it's going to be an exhaustion gap. Here, a doji bar, not a strong sell bar, but here we have a bear bar closing on its low. That makes me think that the odds are this will end up as an exhaustive end of the trend instead of the start of an even stronger trend. Remember, most buy climaxes do not lead to bear trends. They usually lead to a trading range. We have big up, big down. Big up, big down means big confusion. Confusion is a hallmark of a trading range. So most buy climaxes, most sell climaxes are followed by trading ranges, not necessarily reversals. Here, we have a big bear trend bar. And to me, it looks like the bulls are giving up. They have a rally that lacks consecutive big bull trend bars, a lot of prominent tails, and a possible double top. So we have a double top after a buy climax. Here, a big bear bar. This looks like the bulls are giving up. The bears are getting aggressive. It could be the start of a spike in channel down. Spike pullback channel. In fact, spike pullback protracted channel. Whenever I see a big climax that's starting to reverse, I always think the first target is just below the low of the big climax bar. The bulls try to get a double bottom there. They tried. Failed. And the bears want a strong breakout below that double bottom. And then they want a failed double bottom and measured move down. So we're trying to get a double bottom. The bulls want a breakout above the neckline, which is the highest point in between. So they want a measured move way up off the top of the screen. And the bears want the double bottom to fail. And they then want a measured move down based upon the height of the double bottom. The neckline of the double bottom, the bottom of the double bottom, the bears want the measured move down. In any case, whenever you have what is probably going to be an exhaustive bi-climax, the first target is the bottom of the bi-climax bar. And the bears who sold up here take partial profits. And that's why we reversed up. Aggressive bull scalpers buy there, betting that we'll get at least a high enough bounce for a profitable scalp. I think it's important to be aware of context in price action. Here we have a bull bar, a bigger bull bar, a bigger bull bar. So should you be scalping here or should you be thinking that, huh, this might be the start of a bull trend. And if it's the start of a bull trend, you want to be scalping or swinging. Usually when you get a very strong bull breakout with good context, it's going to lead to some kind of a measured move up. The first thought I always have is the open of the first bar of the strong breakout to the close of the final bar of the strong breakout, leading to a measured move up. This is the final bar of the strong breakout. We have another bull bar and another one here, but this one has that big tail on the top of the bar. This is to me the end of the very strong breakout. In any case, traders have to be confident 60% or more that the market is going higher. And therefore, it's better to be swinging at least part of your position. The bears are giving up. Through here, there's trading taking place, which means bulls are buying and bears are selling. And as the bears see this start to go up, more and more bears give up. The market is always in long. The odds are we're going higher. Buying has a strong traders equation. A successful breakout means that the bulls have a successful profitable trade. The trader is satisfied. Bears are giving up. Bulls are making money. We have a bear breakout here. And it's a strong breakout. And the context is good. Here we had a lot of trading range price action. Maybe a higher low in an attempt to resume this rally. So, leg one pullback, maybe leg two. Instead, we got a big surprise. A pair of consecutive bear bars. Big bear bars closing on their lows. At a minimum, they'll probably lead to at least a measured move down from the open of the first bar to the close of the second bar. So, a minimum target is down here. Traders are confident that the market is going lower. Traders should be swinging at least part of their trade. The bulls are giving up. The bulls are hoping for a higher low and a second leg up. First leg pullback, second leg. Instead, they gave up. And they're quickly selling. The bears are selling as well. Everyone sees that the momentum down is very strong. And the market has changed. So, instead of a possible bull flag, we have a very strong bear breakout. It's probably the start of a bear trend. The bulls are selling. Selling is a very strong trader's equation. And the successful breakout simply means that traders who shorted made money. The traders are satisfied. So, we have a strong bear breakout. And it was successful. We went lower. Successful because the bears who sold made money. When the market is in a strong breakout, the pullbacks are usually small. When the market is in a weaker breakout, the pullbacks can be deep. And the market can look much more like a trading range. Take a look at this. We have a breakout, but a tail closed at that low instead of below the bar. We have consecutive bear bars. Again, big tail. Does this look like a strong bear breakout or does it look like a weak bear breakout? It looks weak. We have a lot of overlap. The high of this bar, the close of this bar, the high of this bar, the lows of the past three bars. The bars are not particularly big. The bear bodies are getting smaller here, here. That generates confusion. Traders are wondering, is this really the start of a bear trend? Or is it more likely a bear leg and what will end up as a trading range? Consecutive bear bars, but prominent tails. And the bodies are small. And because the bear breakout is weak, there's less certainty, less conviction on the part of the bears. A lot of the bears don't want to sell at the low. They only want to sell higher. Bulls see the weakness and they'll buy below bars. They'll buy bear closes, betting that the bears will not get consecutive closes. They'll buy reversals up, betting that this is probably a bear leg and what will become a trading range. We're rallying here, but what do you see? Big bull bar, but followed by only a bull doji and then by a bear bar. Another bull bar, but smaller than the first, was it followed by a doji. And we did not break above the top of the cell climax. We're breaking out to the upside, but look. Weak rally, bad follow through, breakout, bad follow through, and lower high. So possible double top bear flag, possible bull leg in a trading range. Traders will see that and bulls will take profits and bears will start to sell. So it's either a bull leg in a trading range or we have a lower high. It could be a bull leg in a broad bear channel. Here we have a bull breakout here, another bull breakout here, prominent tails, the absence of consecutive big bull bars closing in their highs. And we're still below the top of the bear breakout. This looks like a bull leg in either a trading range or in a bear flag. We're trying to get a second leg up, decent bull bar, but look at this, the follow through, a pair of dojis. And then another bull breakout, but big tail followed by a bear bar. This looks like a weak breakout, probably a bull leg in a trading range or in a bear flag. Weak bull breakout. We have a bear channel, bull breakout. You have to assume pullbacks will be deep and last a lot of bars. Weak bull breakout. You have to assume the pullbacks will be deep or last a lot of bars. So possible trading range. Here we're in a broad bull channel, higher low. But let's take a look at the bear breakout and the bull breakout. We're selling off. We have a double top, slightly lower high double top, neckline. We broke below the neckline, but look at the breakout bar, a bull bar. And look at the sell off. We have consecutive bear bars, but not particularly big. We have a big bear bar here, but then a bull bar. Here, same thing. A pair of bear bars, not very big. A pair of bear bars, this one's big, but did not close below the neckline of this double top. And it was followed by a bull bar. Whenever I see a bear breakout that does not look very strong, I assume there will be a deep pullback. Or at least a pullback with a lot of bars. Bear breakout, not very strong. Here we got a pullback that was at least 50% up. Big bear breakout and expect a deep pullback. It's either a bear leg in what will become a trading range or a bear leg in what will become a weak bear trend. Here it became a bear leg in what was a trading range to this point. And then we got a bull breakout. Bear breakout, but probably a bear leg in a trading range. And not likely the start of a strong bear trend. Here we got a bull breakout bar. We're trying to break above the top of this bear channel. A higher low, double bottom. Maybe a higher low, major trend reversal. But look at the follow through. Four bull bars, yes. But where are the consecutive big bull bars closing on their highs? Traders are confused. Maybe it's big down, big up, big confusion and trading range. This is not a strong rally. Not a strong bull breakout. So you have to assume we get a deep pullback. Here we pull back to about 50%. Here we have a good looking bull bar, but terrible follow through. So we have to assume a deep pullback. In fact, we got a reversal instead of simply a deep pullback. Bear breakout, deep pullback. It remained a trading range until this point. So it remained a trading range for a lot of bars. A rally, but no consecutive big bull trend bars closing on their highs. Prominent tails on tops of the bars. A lot of trading range price action to the left. The middle of all of that price action. So the middle of a trading range. This is more likely simply a deep pullback in this bear trend than the start of a bull trend. Or it's a bull leg in a trading range rather than the start of a bull trend. Ultimately, we did continue up. But at this point, the odds are it's probably a bull leg in a trading range. You have to assume there will be a deep pullback or the market will continue sideways for a lot of bars. Here we pulled back about 50% of the height of the bull breakout. Probably a bull leg in a trading range. And the market did remain in a trading range for about 10 more bars or so. In this video, I began by talking about big breakouts occurring after 20 or more bars into a trend. Will the breakout lead to an exhaustive move, a trading range or reversal? Or instead, is it the start of a new accelerated lag? A measuring gap. Finally, I talked about how weaker breakouts tend to have deeper pullbacks. And they occur more commonly in broad channels and in trading ranges. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the fifth of seven videos on breakouts. ... ... ... ... ... ... ...