 This is Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading breakouts. Whenever a breakout is weak or the follow through is bad, it's probably going to evolve into a trading range. I'm also going to talk about bear breakouts. We have an attempt at a wedge bear flag. Reverse down, reverse down, reverse down. But instead we've got a bull breakout and decent bull follow through. At this point, you know a couple of things. One is the market wants to go up. However, you do not know if it's going to continue up. Maybe a small pullback can continue up or if it'll have a very deep pullback. If it has a very deep pullback instead of a breakout into a bull trend, it's probably going to be a breakout that leads to a trading range. Less likely, you'll get a failed breakout and a reversal down. Usually you need more than just this micro double top. You have a high one bull flag. We went up, we went down, we went up, maybe we go down. This is a strong enough breakout so that the odds are the first reversal down will be bought, even if it's a deep reversal. If it's a deep reversal, you're probably going to see a trading range. If it's a small reversal, you'll probably see some kind of a measured move up based upon the height of the breakout or maybe based upon the height of the trading range. You're already up to about a measured move based on the height of the trading range. We have a trading range lasting about 15 or 20 bars. A lot of prominent tails below bars. And we have a small reversal up. We have a wedge, so it's a small spike in channel. Spike, pullback. Second push, pullback. And then third push. Instead of testing down to the bottom of the channel and forming a trading range, we're getting a bull breakout. At this point, the height of this trading range, this wedge bear flag, is about half the size of a normal day's range. And therefore, you're expecting a normal day's range. Hence, you expect the range to approximately double. You don't know if this is going to be the start of a bull trend day and result in a bull trend that's much bigger than an average day. However, with this tail on the top of the breakout bar, new high of the day, breakout, and then a big tail on top, it looks like a weak breakout. And also, the bars in the breakout are not particularly big. Tail, small bar, small bar, tail. Whenever you see a breakout that's weak, you have to assume that the breakout is going to lead to a trend. However, it's probably going to be a weak trend, like a trending trading range day, where you have a trading range, you break out for three, four, five bars, and then you form another trading range. Whenever you have a breakout that does not look as strong as you would like, it's probably going to be a bull leg in a trading range rather than the start of a big bull trend. It still could be a spike, pull back, and then we could channel up for the rest of the day. But the bars are not especially big compared to the bodies of the bars over here. And you have that tail, and you have the bad follow through here after a breakout bar, plus the breakout bar has a tail as well. This looks like a weak breakout, and that increases the chances that it will evolve into a trading range pretty soon. We just don't yet know if the trading range will be a channel up and then a range, or if it will be immediate reversal down and then a range down here. And this is what we got. We had a deep pullback, more than half. We pulled back below this breakout point, but not below the top of the wedge. We had three consecutive bear bars all closing below their midpoints, and two closing near their lows. This is enough of a big up, big down move to create big confusion. And confusion usually results in the market going sideways. At the close of this bar, most traders assumed that the pullback was too deep for the breakout to be leading to a strong bull trend. They instead assumed that, yes, we're probably always in long, and we're probably going to stay long for 10, 20, or 30 bars. However, the pullback is deep, deep enough so that the bulls are sufficiently disappointed that they'll be scalping near new highs instead of buying breakouts to new highs. And the bears see this deep pullback as well as a sign of weak bulls, strong bears. And when the market gets up near the high, the bears sell, betting that a trading range is more likely than a bull trend. Buy low, sell high, and scalp. You can see the videos on trading and trading ranges for stock placements and how to trade when the market does this. I said that after the weak breakout and then the deep pullback, traders expect a trading range, so they buy low, sell high, and scalp. Both the bulls and bears are buying low. The bulls are buying, expecting a test up to the top of the range where they'll scalp out. And the bears are buying low because they sold high and they're buying back their shorts. Both bulls and bears are selling high. Bears are selling high, betting that breakouts of bull flags or of the top of the range will fail. So they're selling looking for a scalp down. And the bulls are selling high to take profits. They see the rally is weak. They doubt it's going much higher. And therefore, they're selling out of longs. This is a strong enough breakout for consecutive bull bars. Several closing above their midpoints. It's strong enough so that the odds are we'll either go up, even if there's a pullback, or if there's a deep pullback, we'll get back to this price level. And therefore, bulls will buy closes. They'll buy this close, that close. Some bull will buy this close. And then once he sees this bear bar, he'll say, I don't know. That's a pretty bad follow through. I have a decision to make. Do I think it's going to reverse down and become a bear trend? Not likely. Four consecutive bull bars in the breakout. Probably the best the bears can get is a deep pullback and then a trading range. And therefore, some bulls, instead of getting out below that bear bar, will hold long, wait for a reversal down, and then buy more above a bull bar, betting that the market will get back up to their original close. It was reasonable to buy that close. If you do something reasonable and you manage your trade correctly by scaling in using an appropriate stock, you're usually able to avoid a loss. And almost always, you can make at least a small profit. The bears, they see this as two legs up already. One, pull back, and then two. And they see this as a reversal. And they're thinking, it's probably going to get a pretty deep pullback because that breakout's not all that strong. And they see this as a terrible follow through bar. So the bears will sell below that bear bar and they'll get filled over here, betting that it'll fall far enough for at least a scout. Bears take profits either at a fixed number of points down, one, two or three points, or they'll take profits on the reversal up as long as they can make at least a minimum scout. And they, I mean, that would be about one point. If the reversal up began right here, instead of all the way down here, a lot of bears would hold short expecting a second leg down. However, if it pulled back to here and then started the bounce, and it pulled back again and started the bounce again, that would be a high two bull flag. And the pullback was not deep. Most bears would then get out with a small loss. Remember, there were by the close bulls, some of whom thought the chances of a bear trend were small. So they held long, stopped down here, here, or here. And then they looked for a bull bar to buy more. They want the second entry to be at least as big as a minimum scalp, one point in the mini. They would rather it be two or three points. They're expecting the market to get back to that close. They can get out, break even on their first entry when it gets back there. And then with the scalp profit on their second entry. The buy the close bulls, who bought this close, this close, this close. They may have bought one, they may have bought all. Anyway, there will be some bulls who bought this close. And they're hoping to get out, break even on that entry after they see this terrible follow-through. Many of them bought more above this bull bar and they get out with a profit on their second entry. And that is why you have that tail on the top of that bar. What took place was a lot of the bulls were sufficiently disappointed by the sell-off that they were just happy to get out, break even if they bought that close. Also, the bears knew these bulls were very disappointed by this. They knew the bulls would be selling out there. And therefore, the bears sold there, at least for a scalp. The market's always in long here. And probably still always in long here, despite the three bear bars. The three bear bars created a deep pullback, still above the bottom of the bull breakout. It's slightly more than a 50% pullback. Usually the bears need at least a micro double top. And this is not enough to turn it to always in short. If this continued down here, below the bull breakout, then traders would see it as always in short. And they would expect maybe a bear trend. That is not what happened. Most traders, even professional traders, do not like to reverse. I do sometimes, but I really don't like it. If I'm in a position and there's an opposite signal, I usually get out of my trade and not take the opposite signal. I usually wait at least one or two or three bars before looking for a trade in the opposite direction. I want to make sure that I am totally objective. And if I'm thinking that the market's going up and then it starts to go down, I usually wait one, two or three bars before I make a decision about how strong the bears are. It's also hard emotionally to do two things at once, to exit long and to go short. However, if you're able to do it profitably and comfortably, then go ahead and do it. The bulls who bought anywhere during this bull breakout saw a disappointing bar here and then even more disappointing bars here. But it's still above the bottom of the bull breakout and still above the bottom of the bull trend. It's still always in long. And this sell off could be simply a breakout test of the top of this wedge bear flag. Reasonable to put a stop here or here or here. In general, I would not put a stop there because the bottom of a buy climax, the bottom of a breakout is a magnet and the market usually tries to get below the low. And if it does, it usually reverses up. So for me, if I'm buying for any reason, even if I bought that close, I'll get up below the bear bar over here or I rely on a wider stop all the way down here looking to scale in. Market went sideways. We're still trying to get trend resumption up. And the bears reversed down here below that bar. And now they're reversing down again below this bar. So it's a micro double top and a double top. If you want, you can call it a triangle. A lot of the bulls who are still long will get out there. And a lot of the bears will view this as a trading range. This would be a second entry short at the top of a trading range. First entry here. Second entry here. Bear bar closing below its midpoint. Even though it's a doji bar, it's a reasonable sell for a scalp down. The bears who sold below this micro double top on the reversal down from the top of the range to the triangle. Try to buy back this short somewhere in the bottom half of the trading range. And here we have a small sell climax and a bull bar closing on its high bull inside bar. It's reasonable to buy above that bar. So this is a good location for the bears to scalp out. We have a bull trend, a bear break below the bottom of the bull trend line. You can argue it's a high or high major trend reversal, but it's only one bar. So it's probably not a major trend reversal. And then we have a lower high here and it's a wedge. Do you see the three pushes up? Bull, bear, bull, bear, and then bull, bear. So it's a type of a lower high major trend reversal. Would I short that for a swing? Well, we're in a trading range and we're getting good reversals up and down. I think it's not a high probability swing short. In general, whenever you have any major trend reversal, you have about a 40% chance of actually getting a reversal into a swing in the opposite direction. Shorting this for a swing down, 40% chance you'll get it. However, here at the top of the trading range, you have a rally where the bull bars have bad follow through. It's reasonable to short, at least for a scalp. I'm going to talk some about bear breakouts now. E-mini. We had a bear channel and today gapped up. A tail on top, but a bull bar. Then we have two big bear bars closing on their lows, breaking below the low of the past 30 or 40 bars. At the close of this bar, I think the market's always in short. It's a surprise given how small these bars are. The bars are very big, closing on their lows, always in short. 60% chance we'll fall for some kind of a measured move, maybe based upon the height of the buys. That means from the open of the first bar to the close of the final bar of the breakout. If we had a third bar in the breakout, then it would be the open of this bar to the close of the third bar. But at this point, there's a 60% chance the market's going to eventually fall for a measured move down from this open to that close. So 60% chance we're going down here before we get back up here. If you had to do something, buy or sell at the close of this bar, what would you do? If you sold, maybe you put your stop above the top of the two bar bear breakout. You might put it up here, but let's say you put your stop just above the top of the two bar breakout. And let's say you wanted to make a measured move down. You sell here. You're trying to get out with a profit here. Your stop is above here. The stop is about the same distance as the profit target. So the risk to the stop is about the same as the reward. Which is more likely? That the market will come down here to your profit target or go up there to your stop? If you can look at this and say, well, it's probably going down here. Anytime you can say it probably is going to do something, you have to assume you're talking about a probability that's at least 60%. And that is the case here. The risk is equal to the reward, but the probability is equal to 60% or more. And therefore, even though you're exiting with a reward that is as big as the risk, not twice as big as the risk, the trader's equation is still positive. Anytime you have a high probability event, a 60% chance or greater of getting a reward equal to your risk, mathematically, it results in a positive trader's equation. It's always okay to take that sell and exit completely here and have you stop up here. If a bull bought this close, his target is the top of the sell climax. And let's say he used a stop just below a measured move down. So his reward up to here is about the same as his risk. However, his probability is only 40%. He has a 40% chance of making a reward as big as his risk. Do you think that's a good buy the close bar? No, it's a good sell the close bar. The math is much better for the bears. The risk and reward is the same for the bulls and for the bears. But the bears have a 60% chance of making a profit and the bulls only have a 40% chance of achieving their goal before their stop is hit. It's important to recognize things like this early. You look at this and say, whoa, wait a minute. The market was very quiet yesterday in a tight range, lots of reversals, and now it's very different. Now we're getting consecutive big bear bars. Once you see that, you have to be prepared to do the right thing. And one right thing is sell the close. In other words, like a second before the close, you sell the market. Or as soon as the bar closes, you hit sell the market and you get filled on the open of the next bar. The one thing that you know is you have to sell. And this is what happened. We got a bear breakout. A second leg down or a third leg down. One pullback, two. The swing bears are holding short with their stop up here, expecting the market to get down here, which it eventually did. It took five hours to get there, but it did get there. Scalping bears who sold that close might get out above this bull reversal bar. Because we have a double bottom and a failed breakout. So we have a trading range. We broke below it and we reversed up. This bar went above that bull bar. And then we're reversing up a second time. It's a possible low of the day. And we could get a bull trend for the rest of the day. And the bulls got a breakout here, two bar breakout. But look at the size of these two bull bars compared to the size of the two bear bars. Not all that big. This might be simply a test of yesterday's close. It might be a test of a 50% pullback. It's about 50% of the sell-off. Okay to hold short. The bulls need maybe one or two more bull bars or bigger bull bars to make it always in long. Therefore, it's always in short, which means you believe it's probably going to go down rather than up. The market kept trying to reverse up all day. However, it was a bear channel. And you have to rely on your stop. If you're a swing trader, you get out if the market clearly becomes always in long. But this is not enough to become clearly always in long. It's close, but not enough. And therefore, you hold short. Is the bear breakout strong? I'm calling it a bear breakout. You can also call it a bear reversal. We gapped up and reversed down. We had a failed breakout above the top of a bear channel. And then we had a successful breakout below a double bottom. Every breakout is a climax. Every reversal is a breakout. And I treat them the same. Big bear bodies, both closing on their lows. That's a sign of strong bears. Very little overlap between the second big bear bar and the first bear bar. A close far below the low of the past 40 or 50 bars. Small tails or no tails on the bottom of the bars. Context, lower prices. We had a bull breakout that reversed down. And now we're getting a bear breakout. And we have a very strong bear breakout. The odds are we're going to fall for a measured move down. However, it might take hours to get to the target. And in fact, it did. I think it's important to always be thinking about the market cycle. On any chart, only about 5 or 10% of the bars are in a strong breakout phase. Most breakouts like this or like this are 2 to 3 bars, not particularly big. And they're either in a channel or in a trading range. And not going to result in a strong trend. Only 5% of the bars are in a strong breakout at the start of a trend, like what we have here. Here we have about 100 bars on the screen. And we really only have 2 bars that are in a very strong breakout that resulted in a trend. Again, we had a bear channel. This is showing more bars to the left than what we see here. The bulls got a breakout above. They were hoping that it would result in a major trend reversal on the test back down. And instead, we got a very strong reversal down here. And the bear channel continued. It's, I think, very important to always be ready to draw a conclusion. Is the market clearly always in long? Is it clearly always in short? And it's good to make that decision as early as possible. When you have this context, a failed bull breakout and then a successful bear breakout, 2 exceptionally big bear bars closing on their lows, the odds are we're always in short, which means you believe the market's going lower. There are all kinds of ways to get short. And again, especially on the open of the day, you have to be prepared for the market trying to determine the initial direction of the day. And here we have a very strong reversal down from breaking above the bear channel. And some bears would sell either at the close of this bar or below its low. For example, if you waited for this bar to close and you saw it closing exactly on its low, you might hit sell the market. And then you get filled on the open of the next bar. Whenever you cannot decide how to sell and you feel like, oh boy, it's going down, I've got to sell. The easiest thing to do is look where your stop has to be and just hit sell the market. And then you get filled on the open of the next bar. Whenever you cannot decide how to sell and you feel like, oh boy, it's going down, I've got to sell. Easiest thing to do is look where your stop has to be and just hit sell the market. Some bears will add to their shorts as it's falling. They're pressing their bets and they'll increase their position size. They're scaling into a winning trade. Some bears will sell with a stop on the break below yesterday's low, especially after such a big bear bar, betting that the market will fall at least far enough for a profitable scalp. Consecutive big bear bars closing on their lows, good context. It's a sell the close bear trend. So the bears will sell bear closes, the close of this bar, the close of that bar, the close of this bar. But they use the appropriate stop up here. We're trying to get a reversal, a failed breakout below yesterday's low. Would I buy that, hoping for an opening reversal up? I would want at least a micro double bottom. And therefore, even though it's a bull bar closing on its high, probably more sellers above the high of this bar than buyers. Also, anytime the market is making an attempt to reverse and you think the reversal will fail, some bears will sell the close of strong bull bars like here and like here and like here and like here. Betting that all of these reversal attempts will fail and be the end of the reversal attempt and the start of trend resumption down. Again, you could bet that the reversal is minor and therefore a bear flag and traders will sell above the high of the bar even if it's a bull bar. Betting that the market will fall at least enough for a scalp. Traders will also sell below the low of any pullback. Betting that it's a bear flag and that the market will continue down. Here, a doji bar. After the bear breakout, we had a little bounce. The bear trend resumed and then we have another bounce up to that same level. It's a small double top bear flag. If you want, you could simply call it a low one short. A pullback and then a resumption down below the low of this inside bar. It doesn't matter which of the shorts that you took. You place your stop above the most recent major lower high. And if you sold anywhere in here, look to the left. Where's the most recent major lower high? It's here. And therefore, no matter where you sold, your stop is up here. The stop has to do with the price action, not your entry price. When the market's in a bear trend, it spends most of its time near the bottom of the most recent strong leg. Beginners, the one thing they always think about is risk. They're so afraid of losing their account. They tend to ignore probability and they tend to ignore reward. And the result is they end up using very small stops. And they repeatedly discover that they're getting stopped out of trends that go on a long way. When you're getting a pullback like this, who's causing that pullback? Is it institutional, strong bulls betting that the reversal will be major? No, it's bears taking partial profits. Their stop is far away. They're taking some profits to reduce their position size. The reversal is probably minor. And the bears will sell again as soon as they believe the bulls have given up. Experts are selling for any reason. Beginners are waiting for a perfect sell setup, a perfect pullback, but it never is going to look good enough. Do you want to sell after two bull bars? The beginner does not. Do you want to sell after a reversal up from a micro double bottom? The beginner does not. Do you want to sell after this bull breakout? The beginner does not. But the experts are selling for any reason, betting that any of these reversals after a very tight channel will be minor. And that means there'll either be a bull leg in a trading range or a bear flag leading to a resumption of the bear trend. I began by talking about weak breakouts. I talked about weak bull breakouts in this particular video. Whenever a breakout is weak, especially if there's a deep pullback, bulls begin to wonder if the breakout will lead to a trading range instead of into a strong bull trend. They're still willing to buy the breakout even if it does look weak, confident that the first reversal down will be minor, which means either a bull flag and an immediate resumption of the bull trend, or the pullback will be deep, in which case a trading range is more likely than a bull trend. If it's a trading range, they can buy more lower, expecting it to get back to their first entry, where they can get out break even on their first entry, and with a profit on their lower entry. I also began a discussion on bear breakouts, and once you think a breakout is very strong, there's a 60% chance it'll fall for some kind of a measured move before it rallies back up to the top of the breakout and hits your stop. I'm Al Brooks. Thank you for watching the Brooks Trading Course. This is the third of four videos on trading breakouts. If you're looking at some indicators and performance on the film and jakات of several Brain좋 심 blossom o'clock . There was one way of cutting edge o'clock . It was a real quick preference with the controls. That's about ten hora and considering a thirds hmm budget we remnants and its should become a natural powder. It's not that all, it's absorbed by complacent but also what입니 haveIt's¡ attributed aaver crisis to take some time with MLP and крут Romans. Let's go to thelık inside to the partner . So if you're looking at the impressions07, that there's a standard fluid phase for the weather you improve it. We're looking. You get it from using it. Up Top 34 which is something that will look great i'm going off a littleauthor of and after our study industry, the нужноō experts to improve the variance inquiry.